Damian Tin Yan Wong
Damian Wong
Grade 10
Canada
Passport number: AJ968716

I am applying for this project because I am interested in exploring different parts of my life and who I am as a person. I am currently still confused about my purpose in this world and don’t have a secure goal that I can work towards. I grew up in an asian culture and I have always been taught to just study and go to a good university. But because of this though I have gained a very good understanding in education, I am unable to comprehend what my purpose is in studying all these different subjects. I wish to know what I enjoy and what I can do for this world. So now I am focusing on exploration of this world and most importantly myself. By praying for guidance from God and throwing myself in different uncomfortable situations I hope that I might find something that can lead me to finding what I want to do in the future. I believe that this mission trip can be very helpful to me in doing so. 
Since it is my first time in a christan school, from my understanding, I believe that missions trip is to help others hear the word and presence of our Father. To help people find what they can provide for this world and for God, such as myself. Only by searching with the guidance of God will we understand, and clear our confusion. Many people have never heard of Christianity and the Gospel, and these mission trips are to help bring these people closer to God
The Gospel is the good news of God, and that good news is the second coming of Jesus. When Jesus is back we will finally be relieved from our sin and ascend to heaven.
My strengths are being able to communicate and convince different people with efficiency. I usually can decipher what people are thinking and convince them to listen to my point of view. I have experience in this already as I was the head strategist in my robotics team when we went to the world competition. I was the person to find a good suitable team mate for us and talk to them to find the best strength in both of our teams to get the best advantage. We ended up in the top 20 in the world in 2022. 
As I said in the first question, I wish to grow and improve upon my goals. It is one thing that I have been struggling with as I lack the motivation to do things. Without the purpose I will not be able to do that thing with 100% of my ability. I wish that through my different experiences I would learn what drives me, and what I have passion for. 
I believe that I should be picked because I am very independent, a team player, and curious about learning as well as the world around me. I love to learn new things and I usually have a deep understanding of that subject if I find it interesting. This deep understanding has developed in many subjects, such as math, science, business, bible, and much more. I would give all of my energy and focus towards this mission trip, as I would love to learn more about God, and possibly explore more of myself in the process. I would be interested in all the activities and would do everything to complete the task at hand with the best of my abilities.
I have always been a christian since I was a child. Though many of my friends don’t know that I am christian, I have always believed in God. He has helped me alot in different ways and layed out the path that I would walk. When I ask and pray, I see that there are changes to my perspective and thought process. He always gives me hints of where my weaknesses are and gives me different opportunities to see and change them. Though I might not have shown it, God has always been there in my life giving me direction and purpose.
Since I have been traveling a lot and living in different places all the time, I have yet to settle down in a church and spread the gospel this way. However I have helped in many church services in the miscual amount of time I have stayed in different churches. I assisted in teaching children younger than me in japan, teaching them stories and the gospel. But I have also done verses readings and participated in many church related events in my past christian school, such as speaking in chapel, helping set up remembrance day, and much more. 
Even if this mission trip might not be in Boston, and in Toronto instead, I would still go on this trip. Because for me it is not about traveling and seeing different things, it is about the experience and the knowledge I would gain. If this trip has the slight chance of opening my eyes to what I'm trying to find, then I would be more than happy to be on this trip no matter where we go.
I believe that I might have been on a mission trip, but I was around 3 to 7 and I could not remember much. I could only remember walking more than half of the Great Wall of China to spread a message about the gospel. I believe that I should be selected for another mission trip because I wish to experience all the new opportunities that I come across. That means I will be very attentive in everything that I do so that I can get the best out of that experience. Walking the Great Wall is an example of that
I have no problem raising support for this trip, as I have many experiences in the area already. I have asked for different sponsors for our robotics team, and in the walkathon donations I have obtained more than 200 dollars just from asking a few of my friends and relatives. I would have raised much more if I had more time. 
I currently have robotics that would take up most of my time. I am the team captain of my team so I would spend the most time there. However, my time there is flexible and does not have a specific time that I would need to be there, so it should not be a problem. 
No
Nothing except for rock climbing for the SSACT block. But i can just get my money back, nothing big
No, because i just settled down in canada we have yet to find a church to stay in for now
I have gotten my 3rd covid shot