Intro 

Sickle cell disease was first described by James B. Herrick in 1910. It was almost four decades later that Linus Pauling and his colleagues concluded that sickle cell disease was caused by a genetic disorder. 
Research shows that the mutation causing sickle cell disease arose in Africa thousands of years ago to help protect against malaria, a historically major cause of death there. Over time, as sickle cell disease emerged, it became known by various names in different tribal languages in Africa, long before it was discovered in western medicine.
When the malaria parasite enters your body, it infects RBCs. Sickle-shaped RBCs create a very hostile environment for the parasite’s growth, partially due to low oxygen levels.
A photo of sickle cell
Because of this, While the prevalence of sickle cell trait is highest among people of African decent (at a rate approaching 8 percent),

What is it
Hemoglobin levels in people with SCD are typically in the range of 6–11 grams per deciliter (g/dL), whereas they are around 12 mg/dL in people without SCD. 
Hemoglobin is a protein found in red blood cells. It contains iron, which allows it to transport oxygen. Each hemoglobin molecule can bind up to four oxygen molecules.  This way, it can transport the oxygen from the lungs to the tissues that need it.
Sickle cell disease is an inherited blood disorder. It is marked by flawed hemoglobin. That’s the protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen to the tissues of the body.
 Not sex linked, 
Cells with sickle cell hemoglobin are stiff and sticky. When they lose their oxygen, they form into the shape of a sickle or crescent, like the letter C. These cells stick together and can’t easily move through the blood vessels. 
The sickle cell anemia allele is autosomal, meaning it can be found on one of the other 22 pairs of chromosomes, but not on the X or Y chromosome.
The sickle cell anemia trait is found on a recessive allele of the hemoglobin gene. This means that you must have two copies of the recessive allele — one from your mother and one from your father — to have the condition.
When both copies of a gene are affected, this causes you to have a dangerous, often life threatening condition. But if only one copy is affected, it sometimes can create a certain health benefit. This situation is called balanced polymorphism.
tne affected copy is responsible for SCT, which protects against malaria. If both copies are affected, this results in SCD, a dangerous blood disorder.
The sickle cell variant, or mutation, is located in the gene encoding beta hemoglobin on human chromosome 11. For a person to develop disease the mutation needs to be present on each of two genes, on the relevant chromosomes inherited from each parent, in what’s called a homozygous state.
The HBB gene provides instructions for making a protein called beta-globin. Beta-globin is a component (subunit) of a larger protein called hemoglobin, which is located inside red blood cells.
In adults, hemoglobin consists of four protein subunits: usually two subunits of beta-globin and two subunits of a protein called alpha-globin, which is produced from another gene called HBA. 
The resultant protein contains an amino acid switch: a valine instead of a glutamic acid residue at position 6. This seemingly small, single amino-acid difference in the beta chain structure can wreak havoc by changing the molecule’s electrical charge and solubility.


How it affects you
Normal red blood cells can live up to 120 days. But, sickle cells only live for about 10 to 20 days. Also, sickle cells may be destroyed by the spleen because of their shape and stiffness. The spleen helps filter the blood of infections. Sickled cells get stuck in this filter and die. With less healthy red blood cells circulating in the body, you can become chronically anemic. The sickled cells also damage the spleen. This puts you are at greater risk for infections.

SCT is sickle cell trait, prevents malaria 
SCA is sickle cell desease, fatal 
Symtoms include
Anemia. Because sickled cells are short-lived or destroyed, there are less red blood cells available in the body. This results in anemia. Severe anemia can make you feel dizzy, short of breath, and tired.
Pain crisis, or sickle crisis. This occurs when the flow of blood is blocked to an area because the sickled cells have become stuck in the blood vessel. The pain can occur anywhere, but most often occurs in the chest, arms, and legs. Infants and young children may have painful swelling of the fingers and toes. Interruption in blood flow may also cause tissue death.
Acute chest syndrome. This occurs when sickling occurs in the chest. This can be life-threatening. It often occurs suddenly, when the body is under stress from infection, fever, or dehydration. The sickled cells stick together and block the flow of oxygen in the tiny vessels in the lungs. It resembles pneumonia and can include fever, pain, and a violent cough.
Splenic sequestration (pooling). Crises are a result of sickle cells pooling in the spleen. This can cause a sudden drop in hemoglobin and can be life-threatening if not treated promptly. The spleen can also become enlarged and painful from the increase in blood volume. After repeated episodes,  the spleen becomes scarred, and permanently damaged. Most children, by age 8, do not have a working spleen either from surgical removal, or from repeated episodes of splenic sequestration. The risk of infection is a major concern of children without a working spleen. Infection is the major cause of death in children younger than age 5 in this population.
Stroke. This is another sudden and severe complication of people with sickle cell disease. The misshapen cells can block the major blood vessels that supply the brain with oxygen. Any interruption in the flow of blood and oxygen to the brain can result in severe brain damage. If you have one stroke from sickle cell anemia, you are more likely to have a second and third stroke.
Jaundice, or yellowing of the skin, eyes, and mouth. Jaundice is a common sign and symptom of sickle disease. Sickle cells do not live as long as normal red blood cells and, therefore, they are dying faster than the liver can filter them out. Bilirubin (which causes the yellow color) from these broken down cells builds up in the system causing jaundice.
Priapism.  This is a painful obstruction of the blood vessels in the penis by sickle cells. If not promptly treated, it can result in impotence.
Treatment 
It can be tracked down at a very young age though blood screening
It can also be diagnosed though testing of the amniotic fluid
Assessing stroke risk A special ultrasound machine can reveal which children have a higher risk of stroke. This painless test, which uses sound waves to measure blood flow in the brain, can be used in children as young as 2 years. Regular blood transfusions can decrease stroke risk.
Management of sickle cell anemia is usually aimed at avoiding pain episodes, relieving symptoms and preventing complications. Treatments might include medications and blood transfusions. For some children and teenagers, a stem cell transplant might cure the disease.
Hydroxyurea (Droxia, Hydrea, Siklos). Daily hydroxyurea reduces the frequency of painful crises and might reduce the need for blood transfusions and hospitalizations. But it can increase the risk of infections. Don't take the drug if you're pregnant.
L-glutamine oral powder (Endari). The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently approved this drug for treatment of sickle cell anemia. It helps in reducing the frequency of pain crises.
Crizanlizumab (Adakveo). This drug, given by injection, can help reduce the frequency of pain crises in adults and children older than 16. Side effects can include nausea, joint pain, back pain and fever.
Voxelotor (Oxbryta). This drug is used to treat sickle cell disease in adults and children older than 12. Taken orally, this drug can lower the risk of anemia and improve blood flow throughout the body. Side effects can include headache, nausea, diarrhea, fatigue, rash and fever.
Pain-relieving medications. Your doctor might prescribe narcotics to help relieve pain during sickle cell pain crises.
Blood transfusions. These are used to treat and prevent complications, such as stroke, in people with sickle cell disease.
In a red blood cell transfusion, red blood cells are removed from a supply of donated blood, then given through a vein to a person with sickle cell anemia. This increases the number of normal red blood cells, which helps reduce symptoms and complications.
Risks include an immune response to the donor blood, which can make it hard to find future donors; infection; and excess iron buildup in your body. Because excess iron can damage your heart, liver and other organs, you might need treatment to reduce iron levels if you undergo regular transfusions.
Stem cell transplant. Also known as bone marrow transplant, this procedure involves replacing bone marrow affected by sickle cell anemia with healthy bone marrow from a donor. The procedure usually uses a matched donor, such as a sibling, who doesn't have sickle cell anemia.
Because of the risks associated with a bone marrow transplant, including death, the procedure is recommended only for people, usually children, who have significant symptoms and complications of sickle cell anemia. A stem cell transplant is the only known cure for sickle cell anemia.
Clinical trials are ongoing to address stem cell transplantation in adults and gene therapies.
Take folic acid supplements daily and choose a healthy diet. Bone marrow needs folic acid and other vitamins to make new red blood cells. Ask your doctor about a folic acid supplement and other vitamins. Eat a variety of colorful fruits and vegetables, as well as whole grains.
Drink plenty of water. Dehydration can increase your risk of a sickle cell crisis. Drink water throughout your day, aiming for about eight glasses a day. Increase the amount of water you drink if you exercise or spend time in a hot, dry climate.
Avoid temperature extremes. Exposure to extreme heat or cold can increase your risk of a sickle cell crisis.
Exercise regularly, but don't overdo it. Talk with your doctor about how much exercise is right for you.
Use nonprescription medications with caution. Use pain medications, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, Children's Motrin, others) or naproxen sodium (Aleve), sparingly, if at all, because of the possible effect on your kidneys. Ask your doctor before taking nonprescription drugs.
Don't smoke. Smoking increases your risk of pain crises.
On the day of the transplant, you will be awake and may be given medicine to relax you during the procedure. The stem cells will be given to you through an IV (intravenous catheter). The stem cells travel through your blood to your bone marrow, where they begin making new healthy blood cells.




Conclusion 











Links used 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3784812/
history
https://www.healthline.com/health/can-someone-with-sickle-cell-anemia-get-malaria 
Why it prevents malaria 
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/sickle-cell-disease
What is it
https://www.healthline.com/health/sickle-cell-dominant-or-recessive#dominant-vs.-recessive
Dominant or recessive
https://www.medicallessons.net/2010/09/considerations-on-screening-for-sickle-cell-trait-among-student-athletes/
What gene it is from + picture
https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/gene/hbb/
HBB gene
https://www.sicklecelldnatest.com/learning-center/causes-sickle-cell-disease/
Hemoglobin amino acid chage photo
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/sickle-cell-disease
Symptoms 
https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/sickle-cell-anemia/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20355882#coping-and-support
Treatment 
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/sickle-cell-disease/treatment
Cure
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/blood-bone-marrow-treatments
Bone marrow transplant + crisper cure vid
https://www.rarediseaseadvisor.com/hcp-resource/sickle-cell-disease-life-expectancy/
Life expectancy
https://news.mit.edu/2023/spleen-chip-yields-insight-sickle-cell-disease-0130
Spleen filtering video and explanation 

