
















Comparing and Contrasting the difference between Monocots and Dicots of Angiosperm Flower, Seeds, Stems, Roots, and Leaves



Damian Wong 
Lab Partner:
Frank Qi
Ethan Lao
SBI3U
Grade 11 Biology
November 6, 2023
Mrs. Stella Tam
INTRODUCTION 
	Angiosperms, often known as flowering plants, are a vast and diverse group of plants that account for around 90% of all plant species on Earth. They are differentiated from seedless nonvascular plants and nonvascular seed-bearing plants by their ability to create seeds enclosed within fruits. Angiosperms have sparked interest and curiosity among scientists because of their complexity and diversity. Among the many features of angiosperms, they are split into two main categories: monocots and dicots Making it a fundamental distinction with profound implications for the understanding of plant variation and evolution. The objective of this experiment is to examine the differences between monocots and dicots. Focusing on aspects like the shape of flowers, seed properties, stem and root architecture, and leaf characteristics. 	

MATERIALS 

Presoaked seeds, such as beans, corn, or peas
stems, leaves, and flowers of various plants, such as onions, herbs, or house plants
Scalpel
Hand lens

PROCEDURE
Refer to page 570, #1 - 4 (Galbraith, 2001)

RESULTS 
Refer to “Investigation 13-C: Monocot vs. Dicot Lab." at the back

DISCUSSION

Prelab Quesions
What microscopic characteristics distinguish a monocot from a dicot?

	A monocot stem will have the vascular bundle scattered throughout the cross-section of the stem. In the roots, it would have a ring-like structure around the sides of the stem. A dicot will have a ring-like structure similar to the roots of a monocot, and its roots will have a star-like structure in the centre of the root.

What macroscopic characteristics distinguish a monocot and a dicot? 

	A monocot will have flower pedals in multiples of 3, parallel ventration in the leaves, and a typically fibrous root. The seed will also contain one cotyledon. A dicot will have flower petals in multiples of 4 or 5, pinnate venntration, and typically a taproot. Its seed will contain two cotyledons instead. 

Why is it important to wash your hands after completing an investigation? 

As the sample origin is unknown, it is hygienic by removing potential contaminants, including harmful organisms and chemicals that could be harmful if ingested or come into contact with the face, eyes, or mouth. 

ANALYSIS
What difference did you observe in the external appearance of monocot and dicot plants?

One of the distinctions was the venation of leaves. Monocots had leaves with parallel venation and a smooth leaf edge, while dicot plants had leaves with pinnate venation and a lobed leaf edge. Another difference was that the flower pedals and stamens of the monocot had multiples of 3, while the dicot had multiples of 4 or 5.

Which class dominates the official list of floral emblems? 

	Dicots dominate the official list of floral emblems.

Diconomus Key: 


CONCLUSION

	This laboratory experiment looked at the characteristics that differentiate monocots and dicots, two key groups within the wide group of angiosperms. Monocots had leaves with parallel venation, smooth leaf margins, fibrous root systems, flowers with parts in multiples of three, and seeds with one cotyledon. Dicots had leaves with lobed leaf margins, taproot systems, flowers with parts in multiples of four or five, and seeds with two cotyledons. This knowledge advances the understanding of plant variety and classification within angiosperms, affecting botany, agriculture, horticulture, and ecology.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Galbraith, D. I. (2001). McGraw-Hill Ryerson Biology 11. McGraw-Hill Ryerson. 




Procedure #5
Monocots: 
White trillium, Prairie crocus, Prairie lily, Blue flag iris, Purple saxifrage, 
Dicots:
Mayflower, Wild rose, Purple violet, Dogwood tree, Pitcher plant, Lady slipper, Fireweed, Mountain avens