People to memorise:

SCH3U Chemistry 11 Study Notes

Unit 1

Chemistry: the study of matter and its composition. 
Matter: anything that has mass and volume.
Physical Properties: a property observed without changing one kind of matter into something new. Qualitative (sensed). Quantitative (measured). 
Chemical Properties: observed when converted to another kind of matter (eg. pH, flammability, reactivity with other substances).
Accuracy: how close a given quantity is to an accepted value. Precision: exactness of measurement (consistent). 
Physical Changes: affect physical appearance of matter but not composition (reversible, eg. sublimation: solid → gas). Chemical Changes: alter composition of matter (breaking/forming of chemical bonds). 
Classifying Matter: mixture (physical combination): heterogenous (all components visible) and homogenous (look like one substance)  vs. pure substance (definite composition, stays the same in response to physical changes): element (pure substance that cannot be separated chemically anymore and compound (pure substance that results when two or more elements combine chemically to form a substance).

1.1 Atoms and their Composition

John Dalton: all matter made of atoms, atoms cannot be created, destroyed, or divided into smaller particles, atoms of same elements are same mass and size, atoms of different elements combine in specific proportion to form compounds.

J.J. Thompson: ‘plum pudding’ model, positively charged sphere with negatively charged particles. 

Ernest Rutherford: planetary model, electrons orbit a positive nucleus, nucleus is heaviest. 

Niels Bohr: electrons have specific amounts of energy and stay in certain energy levels/shells. 

Erwin Schrodinger: electrons move in a cloud of space, positively charged nucleus. 

Modern View of Atom: smallest particle of an element that still retains the identity and properties of the element, 10-10m diameter, mass of 1 amu (1.66 * 10-24 g).

A = mass number (p+n mass), X = element symbol, Z = atomic number (#p, #e).

Isotopes: atoms of an element that have the same number of protons but different number of neutrons. 
Similar chemical properties but different mass.
Added neutrons has a stabilizing effect as the number of protons increases.
Neutrons are very dense. 
When neutrons != protons, nucleus is unstable and decays. Radioisotopes: isotopes with unstable nuclei that decay into different, often stable, isotopes.
eg. Cobalt-60 (27p, 22n).

Isotopes and Average Atomic Mass

Isotopic Abundance: the relative amount in which each isotope is present in an element.
Average Atomic Mass: of an element is the weighted average of the masses of the element's isotopes. Takes into account the abundance of each isotope in the element.  
Equation: average atomic mass = [atomic mass A * isotopic abundance (u)] + [atomic mass B * isotopic abundance (u)] ***sigfigs

Lewis Diagrams

Valence Electrons: electronics in the outermost shell of an atom, electrons involved in formation of bonds, thus, responsible for chemical properties of elements. 
Lewis Diagram/ Electron Dot Diagram: chemical symbol in the middle with dots around (valence electrons). 

1.2 The Periodic Table & 1.3 Explaining Periodic Trends

Dimitri Mendeleev: organized p-table in order of increasing mass, similar properties in columns. The Periodic Law: when elements are arranged by atomic number, their chemical and physical properties recur periodically. Period: row (number of electron shells). Group: column ( elements in a group have the same number of electrons in their valence shell). 

***categories

Alkali Metals (Group 1): Soft, highly reactive (esp. water). React to give a M+1 cation.
Alkaline Earth Metals (Group 2): not as reactive as alkali, very hard, high melting points, can form more than one ion. React to give a M+2 cation.

Atomic Radius: the distance from the center of an atom of the boundary within which the electrons spend most of their time. ***Protons being added to nucleus increase the positive nuclear charge, further attracting the electrons in and decreasing the size. 

Ionization Energy: the amount of energy required to remove the outermost electron from an atom or ion in the gaseous state. ***Protons beings added to the nucleus increases the positive charge, further attracting electrons, making it more difficult to pull electrons off. 

Electron Affinity: the energy absorbed or released when an electron is added to a neutral atom. ***When adding an electron, the atom usually becomes more stable. Energy is released from unstable atom becomes stable. ??? double check with Ms. Cho

Electronegativity: an indicator of the relative ability of an atom to attract shared electrons. ***The positively charged nucleus of a small atom can get much closer to the electrons shared with another atom and thus exert a stronger attractive force on those electrons. 

2.1 The Formation of Ionic and Covalent Bonds


Unit 2:



Unit 3: 