SNC2D Date:  IMPACTS OF CHEMICAL CHANGES ON SOCIETY 
NAME: _____________________ 
Introduction 
There are many chemical changes that have an impact on society. These impacts  include economic benefits, technological benefits, harming the environment. In this assignment  each person will research either a single or double displacement chemical reaction and present  their findings by filling in the INFORMATION SHEET. 
Assignment 
You will complete the information sheet based on one of the topics below. 1. briefly describe the physical and chemical properties of the reactants and products. 2. give the word & chemical equations for the reaction (be as specific as possible) 
3. provide details of how the reaction impacts society (economy, health, environment,  property damage, usefulness, etc.) either directly or indirectly (e.g. in trying to  prevent the reaction). 
Choice of Topic: Look at the list of chemical reactions you can choose from below… • iron production 
• neutralization reactions: a) pool maintenance b) liming lakes c) neutralizing acid spills • softening water  
• scrubbing smokestack emissions 
1
SNC2D Date:  
SNC2D CHEMICAL CHANGES INFORMATION SHEET
1. Briefly describe the physical and chemical properties of the reactants. (K/U - 4 marks) 
Neutralizing acid spills typically involves the use of a base to react with the acid and neutralize its pH. The physical and chemical properties of the reactants and products during this process can vary depending on the specific acid and base being used. 
Acids commonly taste sour and have the potential to corrode, which means they can eat away at objects like metals or skin. Additionally, they typically have a pH level below 7, which denotes a high hydrogen ion (H+) concentration. In addition to producing hydrogen gas when reacting with some metals, acids can also produce salts and water when reacting with bases. Contrarily, bases often have a bitter flavor and a slick texture. They often have a pH level above 7, which denotes a low hydrogen ion concentration and a higher hydroxide ion concentration (OH-). Bases can react with some metals to produce hydrogen gas as well as neutralize acids to produce salts and water.
2. Briefly describe the physical and chemical properties of the products. (K/U - 4 marks) 
When acids and bases react, they can produce a range of products with their own distinct physical and chemical properties. When the acid-base is neutralized, an acid and a base will always react to form a salt (salt does not mean normal table salt; it is what is left over after water is formed) and water. The physical and chemical properties of the resulting salt will depend on the properties of the acid and base involved in the reaction.
3. Give the word & chemical equation for your reaction. *Make sure it’s balanced. (K/U - 3  marks) 
Nitric acid (HNO3) and calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2) react to form calcium nitrate (Ca(NO3)2) and water (H2O).
2HNO3 + Ca(OH)2 → Ca(NO3)2 + 2H2O
4. Describe how the reaction positively impacts society? (for example with respect to the  economy, health, environment, usefulness, etc.) Describe both direct and indirect impacts. (A,  C - 3 marks) 
Acid spills have the potential to seriously damage infrastructure, the environment, and public health. We can conserve biodiversity, ecosystem health, and general public health by neutralizing acid spills to stop additional environmental harm. By limiting the expenses involved with repairing or replacing damaged assets, the procedure also aids in easing the financial load on enterprises and governments. This can have an immediate effect on the economy by encouraging ethical business conduct and averting infrastructural damage over the long term. By encouraging the creation of new technology and methods for environmental restoration, neutralizing acid spills can indirectly promote innovation.
2
SNC2D Date:  
5. Describe how the reaction negatively impacts society? (for example with respect to the  economy, health, environment, usefulness, etc.) Describe both direct and indirect impacts. (A,  C - 3 marks) 
The neutralization procedure can have negative effects on society, both directly and indirectly. The cost of the supplies and personnel needed to neutralize the acid, which can be substantial, especially if the spill is extensive or if there is damage to infrastructure, equipment, or other assets, is one example of a direct impact. The chemicals used to neutralize the acid or the byproducts of the neutralization process may have indirect effects on the environment. These chemicals can produce pollution and have detrimental impacts on the environment and public health when they are produced and disposed of. Additionally, the time needed to neutralize an acid spill can disrupt business operations, which can cost money and productivity.
3