Civics project
Damian 

Three remarkable citizens: 
Mr beast 
He is an influencer that helps his community by giving out money to those in need of financial support, and charities. As a huge influencer anything that he says will get done with millions of people helping. So he uses this power to help the environment and try to make a difference in the world
Elon Musk 
CEO that has a dream to save the environment, even though he almost failed many different times he still tried again. So made the first successful widely spread electrical car in hopes to change our primary energy source
Steve Jobs 
CEO that made smartphones a normal thing, His innovative products changed the way people, businesses and the world operate. He made everything change from entertainment to banking, everything has been influenced by apple. So through this he has done his best to help his community be more effective

The most remarkable citizen
	 I believe that the most remarkable citizen is mr beast. Not only does he entertain more than a 100 million people on social media, he donates a lot of money to charity. He believes that it is his duty to help people that are less fortunate than him, and help people who are struggling. As a huge influencer, being able to give everything for other people and not keep anything himself makes himself a very remarkable citizen. His goal is to help his community and do the best that he can to support it. In his videos he has planted 1 million trees, donated millions of dollars to charity. Spending hundreds of millions on normal people that need that financial support. Though spending a lot of money on useless things for content purposes, he has spent 10 times more on things to help his community. 

How we can be good citizens
	We should act in a way so that we can be of good use to our community. Only when the people are strong will the community thrive with us, benefiting ourselves in the process. By doing things in the best interest of our community, and not just for ourselves, we will become good citizens that can help our community, which will benefit us as well. I believe that being a good citizen means that you do your best for the community, and help when there are problems. 