Ins Choi:
Have two sisters and cousins. 
They were academically good, however Ins is not. 
In grade 8 took piano lessons, forced to practice 30 minutes every night. 
Started fooling around, just playing the voice.
Was sad when playing, wanted to express, therefore picked the pencil and started to write: poems, songs….

Got into york university of acting, then started writing kim’s convenience (a play). 
In 2002, I met a homeless man, talked for an hour, had an impression of how amazing the experience is, started writing and turned to poetry or writings. Combined to form a piece

Guno Park, friend of Ins, asks Park to do a book together. → SSOTC (monologue)

Start of book:
Prepare:
Summary: The poem is about the command given to Christians to prepare the way of the Lord and the many failing ways that Christians have interpreted and lived out this command.
Structure: 6 Stanzas, 27 lines, rhythm created through rhyme
Devices: Allusion (Isaiah 40:3; John 1:23); Diction; Repetition & Refrain
Tone: Oscillates from playful to sombre and from empathetic to accusing

God is Calling:
Summary: The poem tells the reader to listen to God’s call to move beyond your self-interest and world things and to empathize with and help those who are marginalized in society
Summary: tells reader to listen to god’s call to move beyond your self-interest and worldly things and to empathize with and help those who are marginalized in society

Structure: 6 stanzas, 46 lines

Device: repetition, “God is calling” & Refrain, alliteration, rhyme, imagery, allusion —> Matthew 25:40
Allusions: no prancing around in your disco pants in a buffalo stance Used to describe a fulfilled, carefree life, like YOLO or Carpe Diem. 
Major themes: crying out, desperation, and begging

MWOW: expresses a calling of love and acceptance from God
Challenges readers to look beyond mere existence and to embrace the call to action from God

MWOW: calling of love and acceptance from God to those who cry out desperately for a little bit of hope and to look past and even disconnect from normal ideologies.
Central message: God is calling ties to books, connecting as it calls for Christians to see beyond what everyone else sees and not avoid or be scared of them. 

A Baby in a Manger:
Summary: This poem retells the story and heartwarming birth of baby Jesus in a manger and remembers the true meaning of Christmas and the birth of our Savious. It emphasized the gift of God sending baby Jesus and the purpose of baby Jesus entering the world
Summary: this poem retails the story of birth of bay jesus in a mange

Structure: 4 stanzas, 77 lines
Tone: joyful, hopeful, comforting, peaceful
Device: 
Repetition “Manger, Manger, Manger”
Allusion to Matthew 26:26: “Take and eat; this is my body”
S1 L9: Jack & Jill —> nursery rhyme: Innocence + audience approachable for kids through complicated message
S2: Baby in a Manger, Pa ra pa pum pum —> Christmas carol: audience approachable for kids through complicated message
Puns, wordplay?
Imagery: A manger, manger en francis (to eat) —> how Jesus is born on a manger and to be eaten by all of us, a gift to give to the world (S4)
Symbolism
Metaphor
Thinker: associated manger with mange (to eat in french)
Lots of tone shift in the poem changer
Lots of word play (manger with mange)

MWOW: Jesus is the changer and is God’s human form that reflects this world, but born in a dangerous yet shabby manger. Manger to rhyme with his next topic effectively —> manger (to eat) —> Jesus feeds the world to life and redemption
Purpose: Remember Christmas + humble birth of Jesus and sacrifice to the world
Title: Reflection to Jesus; Themes of Vulnerability

Bread
Structure: 3 pages, 7 stanzas, 107 lines.
Devices
Bread is metaphor of life itself
bread has always been referred to the body of Christ in John 6:33-35
First 4 stanzas begin with bread, french to italian to korean to hebrew.
Stanza 5: associate with symbolism and history of bread
Stanza 6: different meanings of breads. Emphasis on each single piece of bread, draws references to Jesus’s death and Jerusalem
Repetition from stanza 7
Allusion in stanza 5-7
Stanza 4: Bethelhem is significant because it states the birthplace of Jesus Christ
Stanza 7: The bread of life is a term used by Jesus to describe how he can fulfill the spiritual hunger of mankind to accept him. 
Tone: wonder, layers of meaning. Also a reflective reminder of Jesus being the core of church
Sacrifice of Jesus in stanza 5

Major theme: origin, history, power, supernatural characters, myths, ancestry. 
MWOW: Jesus is the core of spirituality, although the church might be based on the foundation of flawed people who sin. The church accepts everyone regardless of your religion etc.

Vocabulary 
Prometheus: Greek religion, means forethought. One of the Gods of fire and a Titan
Institutionalized: made by something and the creator controls it.
Aphrodite: Goddess of beauty and love
Tetragrammaton: in Hebrew, word means God
Commercialized: selling something or using something to gain money

Notes
Stanza 6; line 4-5. City repetition part, corresponds to Israel & Palestine. Jerusalem is a highly conflicted topic, the city of peace is there existing but is in pieces (broken).

Contrast between pleases (don’t change to pleasure) and polices. (tone change)
Why: ‘pleases’ meant a designated place, ideal nation
         ‘Polices’ (don’t change to policies)  meant this place is under security issues, making a big contrast.

It’s a desired place for Palestine to live, but a city that states the high security Israel puts in Gaza.

3rd page
Mentioned Aphrodite, Prometheus, Superman and etc. They all have weakness, not Jesus.





We’re Being Played
Summary: Reminds Christians today that the world is trying to steal our focus and turn it towards our fleshly desires —> talks about how Christians who are caught up in world desires will never be satisfied
Summary: remind Christian that world is stealing our focus, turns it towards our fleshly desires.
Structure: 13 stanza, 86 lines
Themes: Consumerism & Materialism, Spiritual & Moral Bankruptcy, Medica Manipulation, Loss of Individuality & Autonomy repetition, refrain, rhyme, assonance
Consumerism and materialism (line 3)
Spiritual and moral bankruptcy (line 82)
Media Manipulation (line 13-15)
Loss of individuality and autonomy (line 23-24)

Devices:
Imagery
Repetition:
“I am afraid we are all being played”
“We’re the consequences of captive senses”
Metaphors: (S4) “Compare media to invisible hands:
Colloquialism: (Title) “We’re Being Played”
Simile + Metaphors: (L9) “Living Rooms like pregnant tombs blooming”
Allusion: (L77-82) “Deaf, dumb, blind, numb kingdom come” —> Lords Prayer
Assonance: (S4) “Booming the doom and gloom of consuming till consumed”
Highlights the mood, and transition of the stanza
of buying more things —> spiritual and moral bankruptcy
takes away people's ability to think deeply and connect with others in a meaningful way
encourages us to reevaluate about what really important in our lives and society
Vocab:
Barrage: concentrated bombardment of artillery over large area
Quagmire: soft boggy land that gives away underfoot
Muses: person or personified force who is the source of inspiration for a creative artist

Message: In current society, people have obsession and consumption with media and the real challenges that people face such as losing sight what is important in life ie: family relationships
MWOW: Suggests that today’s society is caught in a never-ending loopUrge to buy things —> society problems
MWOW: today’s society is caught in a never-ending loop of buying more things and being passive, leading to spiritual and moral bankruptcy. Author proposes that this cycle takes away people’s ability to think deeply and connect with others in a meaningful way. He encourages us to reevaluate what's really important in our lives and society. 

Worth noteting:
Title, manipulation comparing how we deal with buying things and media to be bing used like game pieces. People lost control    (colloquialism)
Line 9, use comparison to show mix of life and death, shows how deep thinking and real life are lost among all the fun distractions   (metaphor)
Line 77-82, combines biblical language referring to a time when people face the consequences of their actions, like final judgement. It shows a society so far removed from meaningful values and so overwhelmed by consumerism, also not caring about spiritual and moral downfall. (Allusion to Lord's prayer)

Birkenstock Jesus
Summary: hypothetical scenario about what it would be like for Jesus to reside in today’s society, thinking how he can manage difficulties of exsistence. Through this poem we are encouraged to think about the contrast between religious teachings and behaviours, prompting us to reconsider our own personal beliefs and our behaviours.
Theme: looks at the process of harmonizing old religious ideas with current social standards. It encourages people to reconsider their perspectives of Jesus by emphasizing attributes like empathy. Through its questions and illustrated scenarios, the poem encourages reflection on the nature of faith, meaning of religion.
Devices
Rhetorical questions: The poem heavily relies on rhetorical questions to engage the reader and provoke deep thoughts about Jesus’s hypothetical actions.
Allusions: references to cultural icons like Elvis, Mel Gibson, Prison of the Christ and etc.
Biblical Allusion
Mathew 25:23, parable of the bags of gold,
Significance: God expected his followers to use the gifts and talents given to them for the  kingdom of God. To make sure that the value of what we do multiplies.
Jesus of Montreal, a drama. 
Significance: Daniel did not live his life in comfort, the inflexibility and judgment of churches today. How christianity has been institutionalized.
Contrast: compares religious beliefs with modern societal standards,
Humor: the mention of plastic bags and dress codes adds a lighthearted tone to a serious subject matter.
Repetition
Major Themes
Christian values
Judgment
Christianity today
MWOW: christians focus too much on materialistic things. They should work towards the kingdom of God. They will experience hardships and should not be extremely relaxed and easy. Ins Choi suggests the main focus of our faith should be Christ/God. Rather than on earthly things, Christians should be spending their time using their God given gifts and focusing on what is actually important. (Stanza 3 as textual evidence, 4th line, last line).
Vocabulary 
A la mode: according to fashion, in fashion/stylish
Screenplay: written work for a source of moving media
Birkenstock: type of shoe or referred to the brand birkenstock.

I can dance
Structure: 7 stanza, 27 lines
Device: imagery, allusions, repetition, thym
Repetition
I can is repeated because it demonstrated what the man can do, highlighting the dedication but also failure of the man.
Tone: lighthearted tone shifts to desperate and longing for love
Allusion: stanza 3, mention ollie kickflip (skateboard trick)

MWOW: God’s persistence and willingness to love us even though the world’s sins are unmatchable by anyone else on this earth.
Deep dive: infinite love of God is the theme of how God can love us.
Speaker: God

But they did
Structure: 3 stanzas, 26 lines
Devices: repetition, imagery
Tone: forlorn, wistful, hopeful

Analyze
Lots of contrast within each stanza
1st: spiritual communication
2nd: spiritual visualization
3rd: spiritual realization

Theme: journey to faith and patience
Major theme: hope, faith, perseverance
MWOW: finding a connection with God is what the ultimate goal of our life
Allusions
Ollie kickflip: 1982, invented the trick, Eodney Muller
Ollie Kickflip: jump and spin the board.
Biblical: 
I john 4:8 for i can dance
P 46:1-3 for but he did
Connection of two poems: connection of longing and desire. Both poems highlight God’s love and journey with us, emphasizing each person’s process and progress with God is unique.

Wine
Devices:
allusions
Mr. Tumnus —> Narina
Zeus —> Greek mythology
David & Goliath
Darth Vader
MWOW: How God can be fully human and fully ‘God’ at the same time
Hard for people to understand that ppl to understand God can be fully human and fully other else (juxtaposition)
Images of: Communion (Last super —> wine & bread)
to remember Jesus’s sacrifice and we are as one community
Lots of alliteration, all characters are half and half. The last line said Messiah Christ demonstrated the purpose of this poem is that Jesus is fully human and fully God. 
Also made comparison how others can’t achieve fully, but Jesus can. 

MWOW as whole (SSOTC)
It begins with beware, signifying that people are doing something wrong, not connecting well to the LORD. 
Begin with Bread, end with wine. Reminds the big picture of communion and the last supper
Ends with repair, signifying that people need to find the way to repair their relationship with the LORD.
Bread= body of Jesus broken for us
Wine= blood of Jesus that spilled for us 
Repairing the relationship with God
Everyone can have a different journey, progress and process with God
call to action for readers to repair their relationship with God
Where There’s a Wall
Allusion to Jonah “is the voice that calls from the belly of the wall” —> element of hope
Metaphorically, the "wall" is used by Kogawa in the poem to symbolize a struggle/barrier that must be overcome.
MWOW: Even if a challenge may be hard to see, there is always a way to overcome it in life.
WHY: Poet Joy Kogawa (Speaker), she was actually sent to an internment camp with her family during World War II, due to the fact that she was Japanese-Canadians. In fact, her writing often focuses on the lasting scars of racism. The tone shift from stanzas one and two not only metaphorically emphasizes the black and white between the two but it also physically through the imagery used to emphasize the two different "worlds" inside the internment camp and outside the ongoing war. As a result, this also further implies that this poem hints at the mood of courageous hope but at the same time with slight soberness and doubt.
Using SOAPSTone allowed me to further understand the poem due to the backstory of what the poet Joy Kogawa witnessed.
Purpose of Poetry
Categories: Narrative, lyrical, descriptive
Hamlet: The purpose of literature is to demonstrate nature (hold a mirror of the nature)
One Mic: Poetry exists as a platform (mic) to convey emotions, challenges, struggle to convey the harsh reality/message behind it
Arrhythmia by Natalie Lim
Title: Arrhythmia —> Irregular heartbeat
Devices:
Vernacular
adds Cantonese phrases
Imagery
her home context, food (sit down dinner —> family)
Repetition + Allusion
“one two” —> CNP (Canadian government hiring Asians to build the Canadian Pacific Railway)
Thesis:
Rhetorical Precis: Natalie Lim in the narrative poem “Arrhythmia” (2018) illustrates/suggests that the second-generation Asian-Canadian experience is a balancing act between grieving the loss of culture and facing the barricades of systemic racism and assimilation. Lim supports her messages by utilizing vernacular, imagery and repetition in a biographical poem. The poet’s purpose is to share the significant hardships faced by second-gernerations asian Canadians in order to raise awareness of the impact of historical injustices and to help others like her to work through the complexities of the immigrant experience and give thanks to previous generations.The poet writes in a reflective grateful and at times, regretful tone for others that have similar experiences as well as for the wider Canadian audience.
Spelling by Margaret Atwood
wordplay
spelling/spells (S1)
Name/word (S9)
Allusion
Salem WItch Trials (S5)
Warcrimes (women) (S4)
Metaphor
Language: Childbirth (S7)
MWOW: In the poem “Spelling” by Margaret Atwood in 1981, the poet dives into the struggles of a woman’s life as she explores the choice she needs to make between pursuing for her family or her career development. This can be seen through the wordplay of teaching the poet’s daughter how to spell in the first and last stanza as well as the metaphor of childbirth in stanza 7.