“Did I make a good first impression? Why did I act like that today–annoying, immature, obnoxious? Am I usually this oblivious to what others think of me?” These doubts invaded me every night for over a decade.

Despite a faux confidence, my early teenage years were defined by a constant struggle to maintain a likable persona, leaving me unsure of whether people appreciated my authentic self or the façades I’d put up to please them. My self-worth became inextricably tied to others’ opinions and my life revolved around seeking their validation. 

I wasn’t always so self-conscious, though. As a child, I was talkative, cheerful, proud to be myself. At the age of 7, however, I began to cultivate a fear of rejection, as I hopped from home to home around the world. Living in Hong Kong and Beijing for nearly a decade, in Hokkaido for middle school, and in Toronto for almost four years, I soon became fluent in “nomadism.” True–I explored new geographies and cultures while developing friendships across borders. I mastered four languages—Chinese, Cantonese, Japanese, and English–while learning the value of adaptation. 

But the journey brought out my insecurities as well. Although my experience living abroad enabled me to “fit in” with peers from a myriad of socioeconomic and cultural backgrounds, it too engendered in me a kind of “imposter syndrome.” At some point, my personality started to wither, as I tried to assimilate distinct social norms to construct a persona around what others expected of me. The more behaviors I “collected,” the stranger I felt and the more terrified I became about not being liked.

Like an actor on stage, I kept putting on mask upon mask, each one catered to my audience. I was joyful and goofy in China, quiet and kind in Japan, smart and supportive in Canada. So thick was my disguise that I started to forget who I was.

Everything changed during my trip back to Japan in July 2020. On the surface, I was excited to reunite with my old friends, but beneath that thrill, waves of self-doubt washed over me. Afraid of having past into oblivion, I didn’t even let them know that I was back in the country.

During my final week there, however, I unexpectedly bumped into one of my friends. My mind spiraled through every worst-case scenario. To my surprise, our conversation was filled with laughter and fond memories. Not only did my friend remember me, but they were genuinely delighted to see me. They said our mutual friends had been eager for my return and had hoped to reconnect.

In that moment, I learned how misplaced my fears had been. My imperfect Japanese, which I had long worried would alienate me, was irrelevant compared to the bond I shared with my friend. When I gathered the courage to ask about the embarrassing moments from my past–like when I accidentally took off my shirt in class–I was amazed when they laughed and said that those awkward moments had made me stand out, and that they loved me for them. 

Since that pivotal moment, I’ve embarked on a journey to shed my fear of judgment and rebuild my self-confidence. This transformation has already empowered me to embrace challenges that in the past would have paralyzed me. I’ve stepped into leadership roles that once seemed daunting, like when I led my robotics team through a period of low morale, eventually earning the role of team captain. I’m devoted to embracing my true self—imperfections and all—while replacing self-doubt with self-care and self-compassion. So far I can affirm that this process of self-acceptance is reshaping my approach to life, allowing me to lead it with inner-strength and honesty.

