HOW DO I STUDY THE BIBLE? ch7VTGB

In order to know the Bible, you must study it diligently. And to study the Bible diligently, you must 
read it thoroughly. Part of this exercise involves how we approach and interpret the Bible.    Hermeneutics is the study of the principles and methods of interpretation. The purpose of biblical hermeneutics is to protect us from misapplying Scripture or allowing bias to color our understanding of truth. 


HOW TO READ THE BIBLE 
Make time

2. Choose a good translation 

3. Find a plan 

OBSERVE THE BIBLE 
Just like any book, the Bible must be read in order to be understood. But unlike most books, the Bible deserves not just to be read but to be deeply studied. 

In the observation  phase of Bible study, we are asking the question,  "What does the passage say?" 

HOW DO WE OBSERVE? 
Observe by noticing 

2.  Observe by questioning 


INTERPRET THE BIBLE 
In the phase of interpretation, you are answering the question, "What does the passage say 
To interpret the passage, first pay attention to the mean
The literary context is the location of the passage within the book. 

Also pay attention to the literary  context. The historical context is the location of the passage within the setting in which it was written. 

Knowing the literary and historical context, we should also pay attention to the genre

Now that you know the literary context, the historical context, and the genre, go back to the questions you asked in the observation phase and see if you can provide answers to your own questions. 



APPLY THE BIBLE 
If we read, observe, and interpret the passage, but do not apply the passage, we are living in self deception
But be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves. James 1:22 

"The ultimate goal of Bible study... is not to do something to the Bible ... but to allow the Bible to do something to you."  Howard Hendricks & William Hendricks 

We must remember that all Scripture is useful, and therefore all Scripture has application in our lives. But some passages are meant to be applied in our heads– ; some passages are meant to be applied in our hands -  and other passages are meant to be applied in our hearts

Applying the Word in your head means letting the Word shape your mind. To apply the Word in your head, ask these questions: 

1What does this passage teach me about God's nature

2What does this passage teach me about myself in relation to God? 

3What does this passage teach me about doctrine or the Christian life (the Trinity, salvation, heaven or hell, the role of the Spirit, and so forth; our relationships, the church, time management, and so forth)? 

Applying the Word in your heart means letting the Word shape your affections. To apply the Word in your heart, ask these questions: 

1What does this passage tell me to feel 

2What does this passage tell me to love

3What does this passage tell me to hate

Applying the Word in your hands means letting the Word shape your actions. To apply the Word in your hands, ask these questions: 

Do I have any sin that needs to be confessed

1Is there an explicit command that needs to be obeyed

2Is there an example I need to follow 

3How can I advance God's kingdom based on this passage? 

MEMORIZING THE BIBLE 
There is no greater way to solidify and capitalize on your study of the Bible than to ________________ the Scripture you study. 

"I have hidden your word in my heart that I might not sin against you" Psalm 119:11 

Memorization equips you with the Word of God on the go, so that at any time and in every circumstance you can fight against sin and pursue righteousness. 


QUESTIONS FOR FURTHER STUDY 
1. If a person is going to know the Bible, they must study it carefully. What do you find most often hinders you from reading/studying the Bible? 

Time 
Doing something else
stress

2. We tend to make time for what is important to us. If someone were to evaluate the way you spend your time during a typical week, what do you think would communicate about your love for the Bible? 

That i don’t care at all
Don’t read enough


3. What practical steps can you take to read God's word more regularly? 

Arrange a time so that i can read my bible passage

