Colossians 1:15-20 & 
1 Corinthians 15:3-5 (Esv)




Colossians 1:15-18 		Wed Nov 2 
Colossians 1:15-20		Wed Nov 9
1 Corinthians 15:3-5                   Tues Nov 23

		

The scripture memory tests will be in a “fill-in-the-blanks” format.  Although there are many good translations available, the translation that we will use is the English Standard Version.  For all Scripture Memory tests, each word will be worth 1 mark.  Incorrect spelling (including making plural words singular and singular words plural) will result in a deduction of 0.5 marks.  Incorrect punctuation will not be penalized.  






Image of the invisible God
Jesus is the exact representation.

Firstborn of all creation
Jesus is NOT the first created being. Rather, the term “firstborn” indicates his rank above all of creation. If “firstborn” meant first created being then the next sentence would not make sense! In Exodus 4:22, God refers to the nation of Israel as his “firstborn son” this means that God ranked Israel above other nations - not because God is racist. Rather, through Israel, God intended to bless other nations. Similarly, Jesus is ranked above all creation so that through Jesus, all of creation might be blessed.

By him, all things were created
Clearly Jesus is not the first created being since he himself is the creator of all things.

All things were created through him
In Genesis 1, we see that God created all things by speaking them into existence. Notice the repetition of the phrase “God said” in Genesis 1. when God speaks, his Word proceeds from him. The Word of God is Jesus (see John 1). So God created all things through His Word who is Jesus.

All things were created for him
Not only were all things created through Jesus, they were created for Jesus. Everything from a blade of grass to a great blue whale has been created for Jesus!

He is before all things
Here, the word “before” is a preposition indicating that Jesus is “in front” of all things. In a sense, Jesus is at the head of the line!

In him, all things hold together
Jesus is the one who has arranged all things in their place. He holds the planets, the stars and the moon in their exact position. He holds your bones, tendons and ligaments in their place.

The head of the body, the church
The church is the oldest and largest organization that has ever existed. It has existed on the earth since the year 33 and today spans the globe. Who is the head of this organization? It’s Jesus!

He is the beginning
Jesus has no beginning. He has existed eternally, he is the beginning of the new creation.



The firstborn from the dead
Jesus is not the first to come to life after dying, the bible records others who have come to life after death, Those events are “resuscitations,” the individuals involved eventually died again. jesus’ experience is the first true resurrection. he did not die after coming to life

Pre-eminent
Jesus comes in first place over all things. He is the famous one!


The dwelling place of the fullness of God
In the Old Testament, the dwelling place of God's fullness was the temple. The temple is the place where humans met with God. In the Old Covenant, people would have to travel to Jerusalem, they would have to be a Jewish male to enter the temple in order to meet with God. Now, in Jesus, the fullness of God dwells. Humans meet with God in Jesus. Jesus is the true and the better temple!


Reconciled to himself all things
Because of sin, all of creation was under a curse. But Jesus came to lift that curse and replace it with a
blessing.

Making peace by the blood of the cross
God, who in one sense, is in heaven, is always the most offended party when I sin. Because of my sin, God's wrath is upon me. But Jesus has reconciled me to God! God is the one in heaven who required reconciliation. There are always at least two parties involved in reconciliation.
15. Making peace by the blood of the cross: The cross represents the most violent death possible. Jesus endured the violence of the cross so that we could know peace with a Holy God!


