Is Genesis History? 

How do we make sense of the story of Creation, Fall and Redemption in light of science?  This documentary places the Bible at the center of this discussion with science. 

I would like you to watch this documentary and note four things you learned. In order to help you look at topics of interest, please look at those 4 of the sections below. Each section involves a  particular scientist.  You are welcome to watch the whole thing and I encourage you, but it is 1hour and 45minutes. 

Provide your comments below: 

Global Flood?  (4.00-13.25min) Phd Steven Austin, Geologist 

Because the flood was so high that it covered every mountain on earth there are lots of evidence 
The grand canyon is one of the major evidence that supports the global flood
The sediments that make up the layers of the canyon was once a liquid that carried minerals and sediments that eventually over time turned into stone. 
There are marine fossils in all the layers 
The separated layers are flat
We should not measure the flood by the mountains we have now because they risen because of tectonic movement 

Time and Science? (13.54-18.04min) Phd Paul Nelson, Philosopher

Science is not really about evidence it is about how you interpret the evidence 
It is not the competition of science, it is just two different ideas of history 
The 2 major paradigms (views on what was in the beginning)
Conventional paradigm 
Starting in with primal simplicity in deep time (the big bang)
Slowly through physics becoming what we see today 
The historical genesis paradigm 
Events are happening on a much more recent time scale (bible)
Things appeared to be well designed and whole 
Everything works together well because it was created not a chance of luck

What is in the original Hebrew text? (18.04 -23.36min) Phd Steven Boyd, Hebraist 

Age of the Earth? (23.43-34.05min) Andrew Snelling, Phd Geologist 

History of the world according to Genesis (34.17-42.30min) Kurt Wise, Phd Paleontologist 

The Fossil Record (42.32-50.20min) Marcus Ross, Phd Paleontologist 

The museums tell you the scientific or naturalistic view
But the dinosaur bones could also be understood in alternate paradigms 
God said “beholde the end of all flesh” so it is not only man that is getting judged it was also all that we have ruled over that was also getting judged 
Fossils tend to be found in layers of the earth were there are very large number that have been destroyed 
The flood moves over the continent and deposits bodies over the rockies, and these pulses solidify within seconds 
Swimming animals were also found mostly on land
The only power that can through marine life onto land is a flood

The Bones (50.26-55.35min)  Arthur Chadwick, Phd Taphonomist

Inside the Bones (55.55-1.02.50min)  Kevin Andseron, Phd Microbiologist 

Time and Evolution (1.03.11-1.12.40min) Robert Carter, Phd Marine Biologist 

Change and Evolution (1.12.43-1.21.29min) Todd Wood, Phd Biologist

All the tigers, lions, leopards, ets shart the same catness as others. This means that the come from the same origen 
These different species all come from a very elaborate design, all springing out from one origin 
Even a wolf, it only took around a 100 years to breed many different kinds of dogs 
God did not have to save every variety of animals. He just needed 2 of each type. And the animals we see today are examples of that

The Concept of Time (1.21.31-1.28min) Danny Faulkner, Phd Astronomist 

Ancient Peoples and the Genesis Story (1.28.10-1.33.13min) Douglas Petrovich, Phd Archeologist  

Genesis and Today (1.33.33-1.39.24min) George Grant, Phd Pastor 

Conclusion 


Extra Video:  What are the differences between humans and ape-like creatures? Dr. Todd Wood





