CHV2O Unit 2 Test Review

Pros and Cons of the various forms of Government
Aristocracy
A form of government in which power is held by the nobility 
P - Power is distributed 
C - General public left out 
Theocracy
A system of government in which priests rule in the name of God/a God
P - Unites people in religion 
C - Strict, too controlling
Dictatorship
A country governed by a dictator
P - Low crime rate 
C - No opposition or civil rights 
Oligarchy
A country governed by an oligarchy, a small group of people 
P - Less political arguments 
C - Citizens don’t have a voice
Communism
Political theory advocating class war and public property 
P - Close gap between poor and rich,  
C - Less freedom, money problems, corrupt government ruins the system
Democracy
Population elects representatives 
P - Represents all viewpoints
C - Conflict and divide
Constitutional Monarchy and Absolute Monarchy
CM - Sovereign is elected, parliament makes/pass legislation 
AM - Monarch is not limited, has absolute power 
P - Less disagreement 
C - One person holding power 
Federalism
Same territory controlled by 2 levels of government
P - Better stability, independence 
C - Wealth gap, prevents national policies 
Confederation
Organization consisting of parties of groups united in alliance/league 
P - Unity, more trade
C - Takes long time to implement
Anarchy
A society without government
P - No political conflict, freedom 
C - No laws/protection, survival of the fittest 

Privilege and Power
Earned vs Unearned privilege 
Earned - Results that come from one’s effort and achievement 
Unearned - Privileges that come from purely chance, not based on person’s merit 
Hard vs Soft power
Hard - Using fear or threats of punishment to accomplish tasks 
Soft - Using persuasion and influence to accomplish tasks 
How can power + privilege = injustice? 
Power can be misused or abused, rich have privilege but poor do not 
Action and Inaction
Consequences of both
Inaction = Stability 
Inaction means issues will remain unaddressed 
P - Important political, social and economic institutions are working well. People can withstand the destructive forces of change and negative events. 
C - New opportunities or injustices may not be addressed because institutions and people are resistant to change or unable to change. 
Action = Change
Action means problems can come from the action 
P - Problems are solved, injustices addressed, conditions improved and new opportunities are made available. 
C - Critical political, social and economic institutions stop working effectively and people’s lives are negatively affected. 

Personal vs national vs global
Personal - Being a bystander, witnessing something bad and doing nothing 
National - A nation/government witnessing something bad and doing nothing 
Global - A country witnessing something bad and doing nothing 
Activism 
4 ways to make a difference
Donate
Donate money, clothing, food, giving time/volunteering, fundraising, buying ethical goods 
P - Builds on what others have accomplished
C - Leaves decision-making to others
Educate
Educate yourself/others, stage media event, lead/organize group events
P - Great foundation for future change 
C - Takes time
Communicate
Speak your mind, wear t-shirt/button, raise awareness online, create posters, vote 
P - Directly influences others 
C - Must be willing to accept criticism from others and respond
Agitate
Sign a petition, join a march/rally/protest, boycott or support a business, organize protest
P - Gets a lot of attention 
C - Can only convey a simple message

Illegal Actions
Civil Disobedience	
A form of protest that involves peacefully and purposefully breaking the law and accepting the consequences. The goal of civil disobedience is to raise awareness of an injustice, or to directly challenge an unfair law, policy, or situation.
Occupations
In 1995, Rosa Parks quietly refused to give up her seat to a white man on a bus in Montgomery, Alabama. Her arrest sparked the civil rights movement. 
Public Disturbances
In 2008, Greenpeace protesters dumped tonnes of tuna heads in front of the Ministry of Agriculture in Paris, France, to draw attention to the devastation of illegal fishing. 
Blockades 
In March 1990, members of the Mohawk First Nations barricaded a road near Oka, Quebec, to stop the building of a golf course on a Mohawk burial site. When police moved in, a Mohawk warrior was nearly beaten to death and a police officer was killed.
Illegal protests 
In 2012, the Quebec government banned unauthorized public demonstrations following a series of student protests. Citizens of all ages took to the streets by the tens of thousands banging pots and pans in defiance. 
Violent Resistance 
Violent resistance is sometimes used to fight injustice. Violence can be aimed at oneself (self-harm), at disrupting a system or machine (sabotage), at destroying or defacing property (vandalism) or at instilling fear (terrorism). 
Self-harm
Mohamed Bouazizi was a street vendor in Tunisia, Africa. In December 2010, frustrated with constant harassment by local police, Bouazizi set himself on fire. Outraged Tunisians took to the streets in protest, sparking what would become the Arab Spring movement. 
Sabotage
Anonymous is an informal group of anti-censorship and anti-surveillance internet activists. In 2012, after the US Department of Justice shut down a popular file-sharing site, Anonymous attacked the websites of the FBI, the US Copyright Office, and Warner Brothers music, among others. 
Vandalism
During the 2010 G20 protests in Toronto, some protestors attacked property, including stores, businesses and police cars, causing significant damage. The vandals covered their faces and dressed in black clothing to make it hard for police to identify them. 
Terrorism
From 1963 to 1970, the Quebec nationalist group Front de liberation du Quebec set off bombs in Anglophone neighborhoods and institutional buildings in Montreal. Their actions culminated in the 1970 October Crisis, which resulted in the kidnapping and death of Quebec Labour Minister Pierre Laporte. 
