Colossians 1:15-20 & 
1 Corinthians 15:3-5 (Esv)




Colossians 1:15-18 		Wed Nov 2 
Colossians 1:15-20		Wed Nov 9
1 Corinthians 15:3-5                   Tues Nov 23

		

The scripture memory tests will be in a “fill-in-the-blanks” format.  Although there are many good translations available, the translation that we will use is the English Standard Version.  For all Scripture Memory tests, each word will be worth 1 mark.  Incorrect spelling (including making plural words singular and singular words plural) will result in a deduction of 0.5 marks.  Incorrect punctuation will not be penalized.  






Image of the invisible God

Jesus is the exact representation of God

Firstborn of all creation

Jesus is NOT the first created being. Rather, the term "firstborn" indicates his rank above all of creation. If "firstborn" meant first created being then the next sentence would not make sense! In Exodus 4:22, God refers to the nation of Israel as his "firstborn son." This means that God ranked Israel above other nations - not because God is racist. Rather, through Israel God intended to bless other nations. Similarly, Jesus is ranked above all creation so that through Jesus, all of creation might be blessed.

By him all things were created

clearly jesus is not the first created being since he himself is the creator of all things

All things were created through him

In Genesis 1, we see that God created all things by speaking them into existence. Notice the repetition of the phrase "God said" in Genesis 1. When God speaks, his Word proceeds from him. The Word of God is Jesus (see John 1). So God created all things through His Word who is Jesus.


All things were created for him

not only were all things created through Jesus, they were created for jesus. everything from a blade of grass to a great blue whale has been created for jesus

He is before all things


In him all things hold together


The head of the body, the church


He is the beginning


The firstborn from the dead



Pre-eminent



The dwelling place of the fullness of God



Reconciled to himself all things



Making peace by the blood of the cross


