What about Science?

Defining our terms:
Many Christians who enter the fray point out that “evolution” is an ambiguous term, and that we can distinguish between “macro-evolution” (grand-scale body-plan transformation of species) and “micro-evolution” (observable small-scale changes within a population over succeeding generations).  This is a helpful clarification, but the term is used even more elastically than that, and it’s helpful to pull it apart to note the multiple ways it can be used.  In an essay on “The Meanings of Evolution,”  Stephen C. Meyer and Michael Newton Keas explain the six ways it is often used by scientists.  1-4 are helpful and meaningful in the understanding of our world.  5-6 move to a worldview that shuts out God and the supernatural from the discussion.  It is 5-6 that I am referring to in looking at evolution.  
Evolution as Change Over Time
Evolution as Gene Frequency Change 
Evolution as Limited Common Descent
Evolution as a Mechanism that Produces Limited Change or Descent with Modification




















  Can Darwinian Evolution Explain Human Origins?


It cannot explain causality (Where did everything begin?)

everything which begins to exist must have a case which is independent of which began to exist (pizza)

It cannot explain reason  (Can you trust your brain? Why?)

If the solar system was brought about by an accidental collision, then the appearance of organic life on this planet was also an accident, and the whole evolution of Man was an accident too. If so, then all our present thoughts are mere accidents- the accidental by-product of the movement of atoms. And this holds for the thoughts of the materialists and astronomers as well as for anyone else's. But if their thoughts- i.e. of materialism and astronomy -are merely accidental by-products, why should we believe them to be true?
I see no reason for believing that one accident should be able to give me a correct account of all the other accidents. It's like expecting that the accidental shape taken by the splash when you upset a milk jug should give you a correct account of how the jug was made and why it was upset. - C. S. Lewis

It cannot explain individual rights  (Where do human rights derive?)

taken to its logical conclusion, darwinian evolution affirms the survival of the fittest. in this case, what is wrong with abuse of an sort provided the abused victim is weaker than the abuser

It cannot explain moral consciousness  (“Is” vs. “Ought”)

it does happen in nature. ought we do the same

It cannot explain evil (Why bad things happen)

*My argument against God was that the universe seemed so cruel and unjust. But how had I got this idea of just and unjust? A man does not call a line crooked unless he has some idea of a straight line. What was I comparing this universe with when I called it unjust?"
-C. S. Lewis-





