/ 12 marks                    Know What You Believe Chapter One Study Questions 
Created by Dr. Alexander Philip 
For homework, you will be required to read all of chapter one of Know What You Believe. After reading the chapter, answer the following questions: 

1. Why was the Bible written? (2)

The Bible was written to give us information about God, and to show us his purpose and his creations. The bible is God’s words and his way of talking to us, to guide us. 

2. When people say that “the Bible is inspired,” what do they mean? (2) 

“Inspired” in this case is not the same as the things that inspire you to do something. The Bible comes from the mind of God, not the mind of Man. Therefore, for God to convey his message, it must be through man, to “inspire” man to write what God wants them to write.

3. God has revealed Himself in two ways: God’s general revelation and God’s special revelation. Based on the book, what is involved in God’s general revelation and what is involved in God’s special revelation? (2) 

God revealed himself through Jesus Christ, as he is said to be the reincarnation of God, the perfect human who never sins. He was God's message to the world. The writers of the Hebrew Bible said that God also revealed himself “In the past God spoke to our forefathers through the prophets at many times and in various ways, but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son" (Heb 1:1—2)

4. The Bible consists of two sections: The Old Testament and the New Testament. What is a “testament” in this context? (2) 

The testament in this context means “covenant”, this is an alliance, agreement, and a promise between two partners. The testament is basically a settlement or agreement. The Old “Testament” was fulfilled in the New Testament. 

5. How did the following languages contribute to the writing and distribution of the Bible: Hebrew, Greek and Latin. (2)

The old testament was written in Hebrew. Jesus was also born in Hebrew, spoke a form of Greek called Koine, and a form of Hebrew called Arameic. That is why the old testament was written in Hebrew. A Greek translation was made by 12 Jewish people. They arranged the books in a order that is used by the Bibles today. Because of the wide spread of Christianity in Rome, the Latin Vulgate was translated and became the official version in the cathilc church. 

6. What is one further question you have about the Bible from reading the chapter?  (1)

What happened to the messages spread by Satan. How were they found and dealt with?

7.  What is one question you have about the Bible in general? (1) 

I am wondering who was the first person who conveyed the message of God, and why or how was everyone influenced to follow God?
