e/10 
Name___________________ 
Know What You Believe 
Chapter Two Study Questions 
Created by Dr. Alexander Philip 
For homework, you will be required to read chapter two of Know What You Believe. After reading the  chapter, answer the following questions. 
1. What is the difference between God’s moral attributes and God’s natural attributes? Provide two examples of each kind of attribute in answering this question. (2 marks) 
The difference between God’s moral and natural attributes are that his “Natural” attributes are what god truly is revealed by his self disclosure in the scriptures. He is transcendent and is separate from his creations, being the source of all life. But is limited by his moral attributes, his natural attributes are unable to be understood by man, there we can only understand what we think his intersions are through the bible 
2. If Christians only worship one God, how come Christians speak of “God the Father,” “God the Son” and “God the Holy Spirit? Should they not rather speak of three gods? (2 marks) 
The Father, Son, and the holy spirit are one person, they are all members of the Trinity. They are equal and are the same person. 
3. Why is it a heresy (look up the word “heresy” if you don’t know what it means) to suggest that  there is only one God who “shows up” as the Father sometimes, “shows up” as the Son  sometimes and “shows up” as the Spirit sometimes? (2 marks) 
Because Father, Son, and Spirit are all one person and can exist as three beings at the same time. They all wish to achieve the same goal as they are the same.
4. Why is it a heresy to suggest that God created Jesus and/or that God created the Holy Spirit? (2 marks)
Because they are an existence with no beginning and an end. They existed together, and because God, Son, and the Spirit are of equal power and existence. 
5. Why would A.W. Tozer insist that “what we believe about God is the most important thing about  us?” (2)
Because we are created in the image of God. So we must do right in spreading our creators words so he can lead us the right way and clear us of all our sin. 
6.  What is one question you have from reading the chapter?  
