Daniel Wallace: Is What We Have Now What They Wrote Then? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u0v6JItV5-w

Learning Goals: to learn about textual variants to understand how many variants helps prove the accuracy of the Bible 
-to grow in confidence in the history and truthfulness of the NT 
Success Criteria: to watch lectures and complete student handouts (highlighted answers could be used on future assessments). 

Daniel Wallace is American Professor of NTS at Dallas Theological Seminary. Published books in their original languages. (ie. Greek Grammar Beyond Basics). 
Questions from Lecture at Biola from 2011:  Has the Bible Changed over the centuries? 
 What two attitudes do we need to avoid when we approach the Scripture? 
total despair
absolute certainty 

Faith without Reason is not truly a christian faith

What is a textual variant?  (6.16)  

it is finding out how many differences there are between the manuscripts and the copied text

Why do we have none of the original New Testament letters? 

	it all turned to dust, as it can’t last forever 

How many variants are there with the original Greek manuscripts?  
260 chapters 20,000 differences 
Why do we have so many variants?   How is this a blessing?  
We have a lot of manuscripts. if we have only one, we can not tell if that is the original. if we have so many variants we can piece back together what Jesus originally wanted to say  


“The New Testament copies have been corrupted, thus we cannot trust them?”  How do we respond?  
All ancient history we can kiss goodbye because there is more manuscripts for the Bible than Greek and roman 


What is P52?  
size of a credit card. earliest fragment of manuscript 

What is a codex? 

a book that is bound on one side like a bible 


Video 2 
Part 2 
 What are the three main differences that make up these variants?   (99% of variants virtually make no difference).

Spelling
Moveable “nu” 
alterations from greek to english

 What percent are then meaningful and have a good chance of being authentic, affecting the meaning of the text.   
- 1%
How important are the 1% of meaning variables?
They are important because we need to consider any meaningful variable. As we uncover more manuscripts we continue to ask questions and move closer to better understanding these 1%. None of these differences are essential for believing the core doctrine of Christian teaching (orthodoxy).

To the question of orthodoxy:  What theological beliefs depend on suspect passages? 
zero 
NO Essential  D octriene  is jeopardized by any meaningful and viable variant. no important bible teachings are doubted 

