What is Sociology?
Term is derived from the Latin Word socius(companion) and the Greek word logos(the study of), which together mean “the study of companionship” 
Social forces are at work in the decisions all of us make

Assumptions and Beliefs
People are social by nature
People belong to social groups 
Interaction between individual and the groups is a two way process (each influences the other)
Claim that recurrent social patterns, ordered behavior, shared expectations, and common understandings among people characterizes groups.
Hold that the processes of conflict and change are natural and inevitable features of groups and societies.

What do Sociologists Study?
Social influence: the effect of other people on a person's thoughts and actions.
Influence can be either direct or indirect
A cycle of influence: Individuals make up the group, but the group also defines and changes the individual. 
Demographics: Population movement, where people live, make-up of a community (i.e. ethnicity, income). 
Social Trends/Patterns: Suicide rates, marriage rates, birth rates, criminal behaviour.
Social Groups: ethnic groups, family structure, socially defined groups(homeless). 
Cooperation and Conflict
Social Structures: military, medical, prison systems
Roles in society: The expected behavior of a person in a particular social position.
Roles require certain sets of values (shared ideas and standards)
Members playing these roles are expected to accept, internalize, and practice certain behavior and skills.
A social group consists of 2 or more people who interact with one another, share similar characteristics and have a sense of unity.
Dyads: Groups of 2 people. Dyads can be significant by themselves or as part of a larger group. 
Can be trivial and fleeting (i.e. clerk and customer at a checkout stand) or multipurpose and enduring (i.e. lifelong marriage).
Triads: groups of 3 members that are difficult to maintain
Examples include polygamy, polyandry, two leaders and one follower, one leader and 2 followers.
Tetrads: Groups of four members. Difficult to maintain; more stable when there is one leader and 3 followers.
Example: studies of social gatherings find frequent clusters of one person talking and 3 listening.
Large groups are also of interest to sociologists
The largest group a sociologist will study is a society
Society: a large group of people who live in the same area and who share a distinctive culture and institutions.

How do sociologists Study?
Surveys, case studies, observations, secondary analysis of statistical results, content analysis, focus groups, and interviews.
Longitudinal Study: aims to gather information from the same group over time, at regular intervals or stages. 
Cross sectional study: makes comparisons based on a number of factors at a single point in time (not over a period of time).

Canadian Census
Surveys are usually distributed to a proportion of the population (% depends on the study) in order to get an accurate depiction of the overall population. 

Sociology vs Common Sense
Sociologists often try to test common sense understandings of social processes by using scientific methodology and empiricism (knowledge/fact based) 
Often reach conclusions that don’t reflect common sense.
Creating words/concepts to explain difficult social phenomenon.

Example: Youth Deviance
William Chambliss (1973) observed 2 groups of young men to see how their presented selves matched their actual behaviors. 
2 groups were nicknamed “The Saints” and “The Roughnecks”
Saints- youth from middle class families, perceived as ‘good kids’ by parents, teachers and police
Roughnecks- youth from working class families and perceived as bad students, seen as problems.
Chambliss determined that the “saints” were more deviant than the “Roughnecks” but they got away with it because:
They were able to commit their acts outside of town and:
Were able to portray themselves as upstanding citizens to get out of trouble
Because the “Roughnecks” were less mobile and had less money they were more likely to commit more acts of deviance in public.
Helped people to see that the public portrayal of one’s self may not actually represent one’s private activities (i.e. serial killers)

Types of Sociology
Scientific Sociology (i.e. Positivism): Stresses the accurate and unbiased collection and analysis of social data, uses systematic observation, conducts experiments, and exhibits skepticism.
Interpretive Sociology: study of the importance of meaning and action when studying social trends and action when studying social trends and problems. 
Subjective experiences, beliefs, and behavior of people are equally important to study as observable, objective facts. 
Sees reality as being constructed by people themselves (no objective reality)
Critical Sociology: Instead of asking “how does society work” it asks “should society exist in its present form?” (critical thinking)
More political in focus and study
A study of society that focuses on the need for social change.
To change it in the direction of democracy and social justice.

Limitations to Scientific Sociology
Human behavior is too complex to predict.
People being studied behave differently when the researcher is present
Social patterns change: what is true now may not be true later.
Being value-free is impossible: The sociologist is part of the world he/she is studying

Who cares about Sociology?
Governments: Statistics Canada. Gather statistics to help the government formulate policy.
Corporations: Social trends for marketing to demographic groups
Small businesses: Where to locate a business and what type of business is best for a given demographic.
Health Care: Patterns of illness, aging, effects of factors on someone’s health.





Schools of Thought in Sociology

Structural Functionalism

	Purpose: to study how social structures function to serve the needs of a society
Society is stable when the basic needs of its people are met through social institutions (i.e. family, religion, schools, healthcare, police, NGO’s, mass media)
Each institution has a job to do and when all parts work together effectively, the needs of the people are met
Everything has a purpose

Analyzes large scale patterns of society and the relationships among parts of society
Example (Analogy): A cell, each organelle performs a unique yet important function that allows the cell to function

Why poverty exists: Functionalist Perspective
May argue that poverty contributes to order and stability because:
Certain middle-class occupation exist to serve the poor
Poor people purchase goods and services that would otherwise go unused
Work a lot of the labor jobs that many high class people will not do
Focuses on equilibrium and consensus rather than conflict and competition, harmony viewed as natural and 
Criticisms: too much emphasis on stability and not change, downplay divisive forces (poverty, crime)


Conflict Theory

Purpose: to study how competition for power forms the basis of the relationships between different groups and creates social conflict
Assumptions: economic power (money), which is the basis of political power, is the key to understanding societies (power, not function, holds society together)
Also can be applied to other power imbalances

Focus:

Power Struggles: Society is made up of groups with different interests who compete for resources and power. This leads to conflicts between the groups.
Inequality: Conflict Theory highlights how wealth, power, and status are unevenly distributed, creating social inequalities.
Social Change: Change occurs when oppressed groups push back against those in power, often resulting in social upheaval and reform.

Karl Marx:

Conflict theory is based on Marx’s observation of economic inequality (can also be applied to gender & race)
Focused on conflict between two distinct social classes:
Bourgeoisie: middle/upper class
Proletariat: the working class
Wrote Communist Manifesto
Saw that economic system of Western society was based on private property ownership and labor exploitation (capitalism)
Conflict->isolation->revolution->social evolution
Marx believed that the result of the revolution would be Communism

Criticisms: Provides a limited explanation of society (i.e. focusing primarily on money and power), Ignores positive aspects of capitalism, Downplays societal attempts to create harmony
No one has incentive of working hard


Symbolic Interactionism

Purpose: to study the individual’s role and place within the wider society and how people create their world through social interactions

Assumptions: the individual is central to understanding society since social roles and values are formed by individual interpretation

An individual creates a sense of self by the reactions of others

Focus: how individuals interpret social interactions and symbols and how this gives meaning to social interactions
Example: We use language to assign meaning to different contexts, objects, and symbols
Symbols hold meaning to each person based on their beliefs, learnings, background, and experiences
The meaning of symbols can change over time and in different contexts

How we act towards people and things is based on the meaning we assign them
We act differently in different situations because we have attached different meaning to different situations
Focus on the everyday interactions between individuals
Humans construct society by attaching meaning to actions=symbolism
Shared symbols are needed for understanding between individuals

Symbolic Interactionism: Max Weber

Bureaucracies often have a negative reputation but can serve important functions in society (Canadian Civil Service)
Weber believed that social inequalities were not only due to economic differences, but also due to unequal access to resources
He thought that government bureaucracies could better manage & distribute these resources by ensuring all essential social services (i.e. education) were be available to all members of society
Would serve to lesson tensions in society and help eliminate inequality




Feminist Theory

Purpose: to analyze reasons for differences in the status of women and men in society with the purpose of using that knowledge to better women’s lives

Main assumption: women are marginalized, deprived of power, and without equal membership in society: society is patriarchal, favoring men above women and much of society is based on male authority and constructed to favor men

Some scholars believe that social status for men is based on their economic role, where for women it is through their sexual connection to men.
Example: cultural feminists look to the different values associated with womanhood and femininity as a reason why men and women experience the social world differently.
Other feminist theorists believe that the different roles assigned to women and men within institutions better explain gender difference, including the sexual division of labor in the household


   

Important Sociologists/People
Auguste Comte (1798-1857)
A French philosopher who was the first to coin the term “Sociology”. He defined sociology as the “systematic study of society”.
He believed that society was constantly changing and individuals and groups struggle to adapt to these changes.
Ultimately, these changes are for the positive for society as a whole. 
He contributed the idea of positivism (scientific sociology): the application of the scientific method to obtain quantifiable data in order to understand society. 

Emile Durkheim (1858-1917)
A French sociologist that was influenced by Comte, formally established sociology as an academic discipline . His theories provided the foundation for structural functionalism. He also pioneered the modern method of statistical analysis.
Believed that constant change (i.e. population growth) and adaptation to changes led to increasing diversity.
Believed this allowed groups to work together more productively and peacefully
Called this functional differentiation.

Karl Marx (1818-1883)
Conflict theory is based on Marx’s observation of economic inequality (can also be applied to gender and race) 
Focused on conflict between 2 distinct social classes. 
Bourgeoisie: the middle/upper class, also known as the oppressors
Proletariat: the working class, also known as the oppressed
Believed the economic and power imbalance between the 2 is the source of social conflict. Also believed that social institutions are created to enforce/sustain class distinctions

Max Weber (1864-1920)
German scholar who believed that social life was full of conflict and cohesion.
Believed that social actions were motivated by efficiency or benefit, nor morality, custom or emotion (rationalization)
Thought that society could be liberated through bureaucracy, not revolution.
Bureaucracy: a large administration with a hierarchy of specialized roles that is designed to help solve social issues.

Dorothy Smit (1926-2022)
Canadian Sociologist that contended that women have long been marginalized in society. SMith argued that sociologists should develop the discipline of sociology so it is capable of reaching and speaking to all members of society.
Believed culture is socially constructed.
Since society is constructed to favor men. It does not operate in women’s best interests.

Talcott Parsons (1902-1978)
Was a structural functionalist who was responsible for developing the structural functionalist school of thought in the United States.
Believed that all social phenomena and relationships could be explained through their functions in society. Thus, individuals and specific groups in society serve a purpose in society. 
The idea was controversial since it suggests the negative aspects of society. Such as discrimination serves a purpose.

Charles Cooley (1864-1929)
An American sociologist. Was a founding member of the American Sociological Association. He is best known for his concept of the looking-glass self.
Looking-glass self: The process wherein individuals base their sense of self on how they believe others view them. Using social interaction as a type of “mirror,” people use the judgments they receive from others to measure their own worth, values, and behavior.



George Herbery Mead (1863-1931)
An American philosopher, sociologist, and psychologist. He is regarded as one of the founders of symbolic interactionism. 
Believed in looking-glass self and further claimed that, depending on the circumstances, the individual assumes a variety of different social roles and learns which “mask” to wear.



Explaining Human Behavior and Culture

Theories about causes of Discrimination

Learned Theory- discrimination is learned through socialization based on the observation and imitation of others
Competition Theory- discrimination against a particular group is due to the belief that this group is in direct competition with them 
Frustration-Aggression Theory - Shortcomings of a certain group results in frustration at the success or prosperity of another group (the scapegoat). May result in aggressive tendencies toward successful group
Ignorance Theory- Lack of personal and/or social experience leading to incorrect assumptions and hurtful behavior.

Experiment: Sherif Robbers Cave Experiment (11 year old boys)


Socialization
Socialization: The continuing process where an individual learns the appropriate behavior patterns, skills, and values for his or her social world. 
Primary Socialization: the process of learning the basic skills needed to survive in society. 
Secondary socialization: The process of learning how to behave appropriately in group situations.
Anticipatory socialization: the process of learning how to plan the way to behave in new students.
Resocialization: the process by which negative behavior is transformed into socially acceptable behavior. 

Social Identity: The beliefs and values of a given society are learned through the socialization process. By internalizing these values according to the group a person belongs, individuals develop a social identity or self concept of themselves.

Influences on Social Identity: Age, gender, Culture, Social Class

Forming a Social Identity:
Social identity is a person's sense of who they are based on their group membership. It’s a product of the socialization the person gets.
More social interactions means more opportunities for making a social identity. It allows a person to interact socially with many people in a variety of settings.

Social Identity & Life Cycle: 
Social Identity is not static. Always changing based on life experiences.
Life stage is an important influencer of social identity, in different points in our life we have unique goals, tasks, and responsibilities.
Socialization is important because it makes individuals develop constantly, examine and re-examine the roles they play in family and society at different life stages. 
Gender, social class and culture are important factors that appear in each life stage.

Experiment: Henri Tajfel: The Social Identity Theory (Painting and Boys experiment)
