 The History of English Bible Translation  - Battle for the Bible – The English Bible  
Learning Goals
describe the key figures in the English Bible translation (Wycliffe, Tyndale, Cranmer) 
understand the differences between Protestant and Catholic view of the Bible
appreciate the sacrifices made by those who love the Bible 
Please watch the video and answer the following questions.  You may need to pause the video to help you answer the questions.

Why did authorities not want the Bible translated into English? 

They wanted to keep their control over the people, because the churches were not doing the right thing and did not want people to realize that they were being controlled. 

When did the English Bible first appear?  

	1380

What was at the heart of the Roman Catholic faith? 

the mass 

What did this ritual mean for the Roman Catholic Church?  What language was spoken?  

bread and wine transform into the body and blood of jesus, the congregation has a small role and the priest face away from the people and speaks in latin 

What did John Wycliffe believe to be central to the church?   What language did they translate the English from and how did they do this? 

	the bible was central to the church and he translated from latin, written by hand

In 1407, the  Wycliffe English Bible was declared illegal.  What did possessing an English Bible now mean? 

they were declared heretics and were burned in the fire

What did the church do to the corpse of John Wycliffe?  

dug up and burned with his ashes scattered 















 William Tyndale was a remarkable linguist.  Why did Tyndale hate the ban on the English Bible? 
He felt it created an unnecessary boundary between believers and God. He wanted his fellow man to both read and understand God's Word.
  In Oxford, Tyndale began teaching others from the Greek translation (1515).  Throughout Europe a revolution was taking place.  What was this movement called and who was instigating this in Germany?  What was the main issue causing this reformation? 
The issue of salvation was the dividing issue. Faith alone was the key to salvation - one could not earn or merit salvation; salvation was a gift of God accomplished by God himself.
 What documents did Tyndale use to translate the Bible into English?  What year was his copy completed? 
The journal from Martin Luther and the original Greek texts, and other texts, and the printing press mass produced a completed work in 1526.
  Tyndale was the first to translate the Bible from the original languages.  What kind of style did Tyndale use for translating the Bible to English?  What are some examples of words he used to give a different view of the Bible from the Roman Catholic view?  
Simple and direct English using words that gave a different view than the focus of the Roman Catholic Church (elders instead of priests, love instead of charity.../
 How did Tyndale’s English Bible enter the country? 
This Bible entered through boats with pages hidden in larger pages of other legal books.
 What happened to Tyndale after he was arrested? What were his final words? 
he was confined, england set him up, “open the king of england’s eyes” was his final words
What did Thomas Cranmer authorize for English churches and why did he do this? 
The first official English Bible and encouraged people to read it, he did this because he believed it was good for people to be able to read the Bible in their own lanquage so they would know what to do and what not to do.
Who are the Puritans and what Bible did they prefer? 
The Puritans wanted the church to be more reformed (how they saw the church as illustrated in the Bible), they wanted a more simple church without candles and
What is the Protestant belief about the Bible compared to the Catholic? 
protestants believed that the bible should be interpreted by the people were scripture alone “we” “reader” interpret the text
Catholic wanted to interpret the bible by themselves a “church” “Bishop” 

17. What is the Protestant belief about the Bible compared to the Catholic?
That the Bible was for everyone to interpret and it was the centre of the church, and catholics believed that the Bible was for priests and clergy and not for common people. They would interpret the Bible for the people.

