Name___________________ 
/8 
Know What You Believe  
Chapter Five Study Questions 
Created by Dr. Alexander Philip 
1. Dr. Peter Singer, an atheistic moral philosopher at Princeton University, claims that killing  chickens or cows or pigs in order to consume their flesh is practicing “speciesism”  (discrimination based on an organism’s species) since one would never kill a human to consume  the human’s flesh. In light of Dr. Singer’s position, what does the Bible teach as being the  fundamental difference between humans and all other created beings? (2) 

The three distinct features that separates an animal from a human is:
Self consciousness 
Capacity for intelligent reasoning
Moral and spiritual sense

This might not be the best because these features is what got us to disobey god and eat the apple, while a dog for example doesn’t have the intelligence to be tempted and question the authority of god

2. Identify at least four separate consequences of Adam and Eve’s disobedience which carry  through until today. (2) 
The image of God was badly marred in both its moral and its natural dimensions.
  We lost our original inclination toward God.
  Our desires inclined away from our Creator.
Our intellect became bound, our emotions corrupted, and our will enslaved.

3. Because of Adam and Eve’s disobedience, future generations of humans are “Totally Depraved.”  Explain what Total Depravity does not mean. Then explain what Total Depravity does mean. (2)

the doctrine of depravity was never intended to convey the meaning that man is as bad as he possibly can be and that every trace of moral rectitude has been lost in fallen man.
"Total depravity" is intended to indicate that the evil principle . . . has invaded each part of human nature, that there is no part of it which can now invariably perform righteous acts or invariably think righteous thoughts. depravity is total in that without God's grace we would be forever lost and apart from God.

4. Compare and contrast the legacy of the first Adam with the legacy of Jesus of Nazareth (the  “second” Adam). (2)

Adam 
Image of god 
Lived a perfect life 
Existed for god 
Loved by god
Son of God
Sinned by eating the forbidden fruit
Suffered for eternity (God’s wrath)
Not saved (heaven) not lost (hell)

Jesus 
God in human flesh 
Lived a perfect life 
Existed for god 
Loved by god
Son of God
Suffered for our sins on the cross 
Saved us from eternal suffering 
Ascended to heaven 














