
No New Land

Identify details in the story that help develop the inequality between Nurdin and Mr. Rogers.



In point form, make a list of the evidence Nurdin presents to support his claim that he has experience and knows shoes.



In a well-developed paragraph, explain why you think Nurdin had difficulty with the various jobs he held.






Reread the two paragraphs on page 37 where Nurdin learned that he is overqualified for the job at Eaton’s. Explain under what circumstances the term “overqualified” got many laughs.



Reread the paragraph that carries over from page 37 to page 38. What kind of magazine do you think the donut shop clerk offered Nurdin? Look it up online to see if it is real truth.



In the first paragraph of this story, the city of Dar is mentioned. Investigate what city is being referred to and what additional information this provides the reader about the earlier life of Nurdin.



What is the place where Nurdin feels “all comparisons begin and end, where your real worth is measured”? How do people in that place measure one’s worth? Have you ever felt that in your social circles, maybe even at church?



Tell of someone you know (perhaps a parent or grandparent) who immigrated to Canada and how their experience compares with Nurdin’s.




What are steps you can take to help people like Nurdin feel welcome in Canada and access the job market?
I think as an immigrant myself, that we can help people like Nurdin, by bringing them into a group that is full of immigrants with the same culture and same problem. This will help them slowly adjust to a new environment, with the support of people that come from the same background and experience of immigrating. After they start settling down, you can teach them about Canadian culture and help with any language barriers. This will help them feel more comfortable being more independent in canada. To give them more comfort, it is possible to also invite them to different social activities and events to further indulge them in Canadian culture. 





From “No New Land” by M. G. Vassanji in Elements of English 10, pages 35-39.