



STUDENT NAME: Damian GLC2O

On the Main page, click on the Assessments button in the menu bar at the top of the page, and then click on the Career Matchmaker link.

Enter the DATE as your title, then click on Start Now! Read the instructions on the Introduction page, then click Start!

Answer the questions. (Do your best! The more thought you put into these answers, the better your results will be. If you need more information about a question, click on the More Info button beside the question.)

After you answer the first 39 questions, you will come to the Career Suggestions which lists the careers that are suitable for you based on your responses to the questions.

We strongly suggest that you answer the second round of questions as well. Click on the blue Answer More Questions link in the Improve Results section on the right side of the Career Suggestions page. Answer as many additional questions as you can, and then click the gray View Career Suggestions So Far button to see your updated list of career suggestions.


Click on one of the suggested careers of interest to you. 
(Those near the top are your best matches!)

Career: Electronics Engineer


1. Read the Suitable For You? information that appears for the career you have chosen. Answer the following questions:

What are the Central Aspects of this career?

The central aspect of this career is building the so-called “guts”of every electronic device. continuously building and improving everything so we can improve our technological side of our society. 

What are the Central and Secondary Aspects to which you answered Like or Like Very Much?

I like to know why a thing works or how it works the way it does. and nothing has fascinated me more than taking things apart and finding out how it works. i like to discover how much thought has been put into that thing we carry around everyday, so that i can improve my self. so i answered like for using ​​Using mathematics to solve technical or scientific problems and like very much for Learning how machines work



Which, if any, did you answer Dislike or Dislike Very Much?
the only dislike i had was Keeping accurate records or reports, that is my only weakness as i am a very messy person. it is something that i hate doing as i can’t organize stuff that what i envisioned it to be 






Click on the Back To Matchmaker Suggestions link near the top of the page.

Click on another career of interest to you.

Career: Explosives Specialist


2. Read the SUITABLE FOR YOU? information that appears for this career.

Write down the Central and Secondary Aspects to which you answered Like or Like Very Much.

i answered like for hands on experience as i love to learn things first hand. i believe that you can’t learn anything if you don’t experience it yourself, either by failing of finding joy in what you see you will never learn or experience something if you are just told about it. i also really like understanding how stuff works so the other thing that i like was Using mathematics to solve technical or scientific problems. it helps me predict what is going to happen and how. so i think that is very cool 



3. Click on JOB DESCRIPTION and WORKING CONDITIONS.

In the Job Description and Working Condition sections, try to find a job task or working condition that relates to two of the aspects you wrote down above.

Example

	Career: 		Website Designer
	Aspect: 		Having your own creative ideas about designs and styles
	Examples:		Designing computer websites
				Deciding on colours, patterns, layout, and graphics

For Your Career: Explosives Specialist

        Aspect:		lots of outdoor work 

        Examples: 		mining, construction, demolition 

        Aspect: 		working with a lot of explosives 

        Examples: 		mines and quarries, blowing holes in mountains, mining  







Click on one of the two interviews. 

Person’s name: Craig C.


4. Click on A DAY IN THE LIFE and BREAKDOWN OF ACTIVITIES.

See if you can find other examples of the aspects you have chosen in this person’s workday activities.


        Aspect: 		blast control

        Examples: 		estimating blast size, planning blast lay out, planning project, minimizing the explosives to create more damage



        Aspect: 		blast contractor

        Examples:		buys different explosives, interacts with customers 



