Brainstorm:
Question prompt:
How does systemic racism continue to affect indigenous people in Canada today? Consider how it may be embedded in systems, institutions, and policies as well as through media, implicit bias, and prejudice.
Essay thesis:
Through the struggles of the children in the book Seven Fallen Feathers, Tanya Talaga utilizes stories of intergenerational trauma, addictions, mass suicide, and police negligence, to highlight the systematic racism faced by indigenous communities. Talaga uses this to expose the lack of accountability, and parasitic relationship between the Canadian government and indigenous society. 
Things to prove the thesis/major points
Policies that harm the indigenous community 
Indian act
Robinson act
Extreme prejudice from violence of police, and local people in thunder bay
Book examples
Robyn’s friends experience
Abuse from the locals in thunder bay 
Silencing of media and personals 
How the reports of doctors have been ignored
Lack of accountability within the canadian government and police
Intergenerational trauma 


History (harm caused by indian act, residential schools, chanie), addictions, suicide, racism police brutality and negligence, 


Reflection: 
I am used to not bother jotting down my thoughts and brainstorming thinking it would not make a difference. But after trying it out in this essay I realized that writing down my ideas made my writing a lot more efficient and effective. Doing a brainstorm helped me organize my essay better and enabled me to plan and structure my thoughts. I learned a lot from this process as now I see that including brainstorming in my writing process has greatly improved my efficiency and clarity of expressing my ideas in the essay. 








Out line
I. Introduction
A. Canada’s relationship with indigenous community
B. Thesis

II. Historical Injustices and Systemic Racism
A. The Indian Act and its impact
Assimilation and control of indigenous peoples
Residential schools and abuse
B. Intergenerational trauma and prejudice

III. Ongoing Racism and Discrimination
A. Experiences of indigenous youth in Thunder Bay
Racist remarks and treatment
Lack of support from authorities
Normalization of mistreatment
C. High crime rates in indigenous communities

IV. Systemic Bias in the Justice System
A. Police brutality and lack of accountability
Example of Skye's experience
Inadequate investigations and response
B. Article on police brutality
C. Erosion of trust in institutions

V. Conclusion
A. Systemic challenges and marginalization persist
B. Canada's reputation contrasts with reality for indigenous peoples
C. Need for addressing deep-rooted issues and trauma


Reflection:
Like brainstorming, I have never really made an outline for my essays. However, after outlining for this essay I have realized how helpful it can be in getting my thoughts in order. Creating an outline has been incredibly helpful in organizing my thoughts in this essay. It has helped me to strengthen my arguments and make sure they are backed up well. Following this process, I have noticed that writing the essay has been a lot easier, and I no longer have to back up my thoughts.












Draft #1

	Systematic racism has been a prevalent issue in Canada for a very long time, affecting many marginalized communities. However, in Canada, the indigenous communities have been affected the most, with deep history affecting the indigenous communities for multiple generations. Through the struggles of the children in the book Seven Fallen Feathers, Tanya Talaga utilizes stories of intergenerational trauma, addictions, mass suicide, and police negligence, to highlight the systematic racism faced by indigenous communities. Talaga uses this to expose the lack of accountability, and parasitic relationship between the Canadian government and indigenous society. 
	These injustices have been prevalent throughout the history of Canada. With each addition of a policy meant to marginalize and assimilate the indigenous communities. The Indian Act is one example of such an act. Although the Indian Act has provided protection to the community, it has also limited their rights and freedoms. The indigenous people were isolated on remote reservations and kept subservient to ottawa. The treaties covered payments of goods and cash and the protection of fishing rights. But also oversaw the cession of First Nations land and the creation of the reserves. This legislation has also brought about bans on religious ceremonies, and restricted access to courts. Through this act, the government formed policies surrounding indigenous schools, with the purpose of assimilation of the indigenous children into Canadian culture, causing the intergenerational trauma that follows the indigenous community even today. The act was shown throughout the book as a limitation of freedom and the pursuit of true education.
	The many acts of people in Canada have also shown the extreme prejudice that the indigenous communities face on a daily basis. Especially in Thunder Bay, the closest city to the indigenous reserves, which has been titled as a city with the most hate crimes. 
	Talaga has shown the indigenous communities call to action through the book, but no matter how much the community has tried, the lack of accountability within the Canadian government has inevitably hindered the progression of the indigenous society. 

Peer review from jeffery and frank: commented by damian 

Reflection:
I have never been good at writing when pressed for time, as I usually just panic and all my ideas leave my mind. However, looking back at the essay, I have found it very helpful. Even when I didn’t write too much, I realized that the short time constraint had forced me to jot down my thoughts without thinking about perfection and flow. By writing down everything that comes to mind, even though un-organized, has helped me a lot in the second draft

Research: 
CBC News. "Indigenous People in Thunder Bay, Ont., Detail Violent Encounters with Police in Human Rights Complaints." CBC News, 20 Feb. 2024, www.cbc.ca/news/canada/thunder-bay/john-semerling-ryan-dougherty-siu-charges-1.6824929.

The article from CBC News discusses the case involving John Semerling and Constable Ryan Dougherty in Thunder Bay. 
John Semerling, a 61-year-old Métis resident of Thunder Bay, was involved in a violent encounter with Constable Ryan Dougherty from the Thunder Bay Police Service (TBPS).
Semerling detailed that Dougherty broke his nose, gave him a concussion, and left him with high anxiety during the incident.
The police report indicated that Dougherty's portable radio was not working, and he did not activate his body-worn camera at the start of the interaction.
According to Semerling, he was following the officer's request to put his hands on the police car before Dougherty unexpectedly grabbed him and punched him.
Semerling was handcuffed twice that night and taken back to the hospital, where he was kept in restraints for a period of time.
As a result of the incident, Semerling has experienced ongoing concussion symptoms and has been unable to work since November.
Semerling filed a complaint with the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario against the police for their treatment and called for an end to police violence against Indigenous people in Thunder Bay.
Constable Ryan Dougherty was charged by Ontario's Special Investigations Unit (SIU) with one count of assault causing bodily harm to Semerling. Dougherty is expected to appear in court on May 23 due to these charges.

Research and Statistics Division. "Overrepresentation of Indigenous People in the Canadian Criminal Justice System: Causes and Responses." Justice Laws Website, 25 Mar. 2024, www.justice.gc.ca/eng/rp-pr/jr/oip-cjs/p4.html.

The article from the Department of Justice Canada delves into the overrepresentation of Indigenous people in the Canadian criminal justice system, focusing on the causes and responses to this issue. 
Indigenous individuals face significant overrepresentation in corrections, particularly in custody, due to systemic discrimination and inequities within the criminal justice system.
The Office of the Correctional Investigator (OCI) serves as a primary source of information on federal corrections, highlighting barriers that perpetuate conditions disadvantaging Indigenous offenders and leading to differential outcomes.
Sections 81 and 84, intended to address overrepresentation, were found by the OCI to be ineffective in implementation, further exacerbating disadvantages faced by Indigenous offenders.
Recommendations from the Commission on First Nations and Métis Peoples and Justice Reform include access to cultural and spiritual programming, resources for transitioning from prison to community, specialized programs for women and children in prison, and initiatives to support youth reintegration into the community.
The failure of the corrections system to acknowledge and meet the needs of Indigenous offenders contributes to increasing overrepresentation, emphasizing the necessity for fair, equitable, and innovative approaches to address this issue.
Culture clash is identified as a contributing factor to overrepresentation by various sources, highlighting the importance of understanding and addressing cultural differences within the justice system.


Reflection:
Doing research has been really helpful in this essay, as it helped me modify my outline to include more supporting evidence. I found that each article has different strengths and compatibility with my essay, and choosing articles really helped when I looked back at the outline. I learned the importance of outlining an essay in this stage as well, helping me plan my thoughts and research topics to better support my thesis.




























Draft #2
	Canada has a reputation as one of the nicest and most peaceful countries in the world; however, despite decades of efforts to confront its dark past, Canada continues to face the systemic issues that affect indigenous communities to this day. Mahatma Gandhi once said, "The true measure of any society can be found in how it treats its most vulnerable members." When considering Canada’s treatment of indigenous people, its reputation doesn’t match up to the stories that are still shared by the indigenous communities today, creating room to reevaluate if Canada can be considered as such. In the book Seven Fallen Feathers, Tanya Talaga investigates the tragic deaths of seven Indigenous students in Canada. Talaga explores systemic racism, historical injustices, and intergenerational trauma through the deaths of the children in the book Seven Fallen Feathers. While using these stories to shed light on the problems faced by indigenous communities and the systemic racism still faced by indigenous communities today. Through this book, Talaga exposes the lack of accountability and parasitic relationship between the Canadian government and indigenous society. 

	This systemic injustice dates back to the very founding of Canada as a nation. The Indian Act, first introduced in 1876, consolidates various colonial laws aimed at controlling and assimilating indigenous peoples into Euro-Canadian culture. “... the Indian Act, with its limitations on freedom of movement and even pursuit of education.” (59) This legislation stripped Indigenous communities of their autonomy, outlawed cultural practices, restricted them to reserves, and prohibited residential schooling, which was the most devastating to the indigenous culture. Residential schools caused lasting scars among the indigenous communities, as children from a young age got removed from their parents and culture, were physically abused, and lived in filthy conditions. “Many of the complaints centred around excessive corporal punishment - children were routinely beaten with leather straps…” (71) Children in indigenous schools were often beaten, harshly punished, and sometimes even sexually harassed. Conditions became so horrible that many started running away. One case that is better known is the death of a child named Chanie Wenjack. He ran away from Cecillia Jeffery Indian Residential School when he was 12. As he was unable to withstand the abuse he was receiving, he escaped from Cecilia Jeffery in hopes of reuniting with his family. It was a journey over 600 kilometres, but like many others who tried, Chanie tragically died, succumbing to hypothermia. Even after decades, this act continues to affect the indigenous community. There are many systemic issues still contained within the Indian Act, like how it once discriminated against Indigenous women, stripping them of their status if they married non-Indigenous men. While this was amended in 1985 with Bill C-31, the legacy of this discrimination persists. As the BCcampus article states, "The oppression of First Nations women under the Indian Act resulted in long-term poverty, marginalization and violence, which they are still trying to overcome today." (Wilson) This shows that despite Canada's efforts to rectify past wrongs, the Indian Act's lasting impacts serve as a reminder of the deep-seated systemic inequalities that continue to affect Indigenous peoples. 

	While the closure of the final residential school in 1997 marked the end of an era tainted by systematic injustice, it also signalled the beginning of a cycle of intergenerational trauma, and prejudice that would soon affect indigenous youth. Even when the Canadian government took steps towards creating a more equitable society through the closure of residential schools and amendments to the Indian Act, Canadian society failed to mirror this progress. As Talaga illustrates through all of the children in the book, Indigenous youth continued to endure racism and discrimination within Canadian society, especially in Thunder Bay, the city closest to indigenous reserves. As children enter the city, they are faced with undeserved hate, prejudice and subjected to cruel actions from strangers “She waved for help, but the car didn’t stop. Instead, it slowed down and pulled up beside the girls and someone threw leftover McDonald’s food and wrappers at them…She’d been living in Thunder Bay for months now and was used to this kind of treatment.” (185) The fact that indigenous youth had grown accustomed to this treatment after months of living in Thunder Bay further highlighted the dehumanization endured by Indigenous youths. Talaga emphasizes this fact by using Statistics Canada to show that Thunder Bay has the highest crime rate in the country, making it the crime capital of Chanada. (233) Darryl Kakekayash, a 16-year-old kid who underwent significant physical abuse, is another tragic example: “… [He] was beaten severely and tossed into the Neebing River.” (233) This incident shows the increased violence and abuse towards indigenous people. Talaga shows through these incidents the brutality and violence to which indigenous youth are subjected on a daily basis. The normalization of mistreatment and the alarming crime rates in places like Thunder Bay show that even when systemic issues have been amended, communities are still racially profiled and marginalized by society.

(include paragraph on police brutality.) 
(include paragraph on addictions.)
(may include a paragraph on suicide)

	Despite Canada’s reputation as a representation of peace and inclusion, the country is continuously dealing with systemic issues that continue to affect Indigenous communities today. Talagas’ stories shed light on the realities of how Canada handles its most vulnerable citizens. Talagas stories reveal the impact of racism, historical injustices, and long term trauma on indigenous communities today. The scars of colonization are still felt in organizations, policies, and cultural structures that contain hints of discrimination and exclusion. Unconscious biases in encounters change perceptions and reinforce prejudice towards indigenous people. Government policies and social biases present major obstacles for communities, resulting in negative consequences in many parts of their lives. Despite efforts to improve, canada’s relationship with indigenous peoples will remain unchanged as long as the scars remain within the indigenous community

Major changes: commented
Proofreading & Writing Conferences: highlighted blue

Reflection: 
Expressing my thoughts and ideas became a lot easier when I didn't feel rushed by time constraints. However, going through the writing process has shown me how important it is to take those steps before writing. Each set has helped me improve the structure and flow of my essay. I noticed that each idea naturally connects with another to support my main argument. The peer review has also allowed me to improve my writing significantly, as they have pointed out things that I would have never realised. By viewing my writing from a different perspective, I have learned a lot more than if I were to proofread myself. 
Draft #3

Canada has a reputation as one of the nicest and most peaceful countries in the world. However, as Mahatma Gandhi once said, "The true measure of any society can be found in how it treats its most vulnerable members." When considering Canada’s treatment of Indigenous people, it shows a major gap between its reputation and the stories that are still shared by the Indigenous communities today. This creates room to reevaluate if Canada can be considered as such. In the book Seven Fallen Feathers, Tanya Talaga investigates the tragic deaths of seven Indigenous students in Canada. Talaga explores systemic racism, historical injustices, and intergenerational trauma through the deaths of the children in the book Seven Fallen Feathers. While using these stories to shed light on the problems faced by indigenous communities and the systemic racism still faced by indigenous communities today. Through this book, Talaga exposes the lack of accountability and parasitic relationship between the Canadian government and indigenous society. 

	This systemic injustice dates back to the very founding of Canada as a nation. The Indian Act, first introduced in 1876, consolidates various colonial laws aimed at controlling and assimilating Indigenous peoples into Euro-Canadian culture. Tanya Talaga explains in the book Seven Fallen Feathers that “... the Indian Act, with its limitations on freedom of movement and even pursuit of education.” (59) This legislation stripped Indigenous communities of their autonomy, outlawed cultural practices, restricted them to reserves, and prohibited residential schooling, which was the most devastating to the Indigenous culture. Residential schools caused lasting scars among the Indigenous communities, as children from a young age were removed from their parents and culture, physically abused, and lived in filthy conditions. “Many of the complaints centred around excessive corporal punishment - children were routinely beaten with leather straps…” (71) Children in Indigenous schools were often beaten, harshly punished, and sometimes even sexually harassed. Conditions became so horrible that many started running away. One case that is better known is the death of a child named Chanie Wenjack. He ran away from Cecilia Jeffery Indian Residential School when he was just 12 years old. As he was unable to withstand the abuse he was receiving, he escaped from Cecilia Jeffery in hopes of reuniting with his family. It was a journey over 600 kilometres, but like many others who tried, Chanie tragically died, succumbing to hypothermia. Even after decades, this act continues to affect the Indigenous community. There are many systemic issues still contained within the Indian Act, like how it once discriminated against Indigenous women, stripping them of their status if they married non-Indigenous men. While this was amended in 1985 with Bill C-31, the legacy of this discrimination persists. As the BCcampus article states, "The oppression of First Nations women under the Indian Act resulted in long-term poverty, marginalization and violence, which they are still trying to overcome today." (Wilson) This article shows the immense oppression that the Indigenous Act has on Indigenous women, directly stating the inferiority of women in society. Even after amending the act, the article highlights the lasting impacts of this oppression, including economic instability, social exclusion, and heightened vulnerability to violence. Despite Canada's efforts to rectify past wrongs, the Indian Act's lasting impacts serve as a reminder of the deep-seated systemic inequalities that continue to affect Indigenous peoples. 

	While the closure of the final residential school in 1997 marked the end of an era tainted by systemic injustice, it also signaled the beginning of a cycle of intergenerational trauma and prejudice that would soon affect Indigenous youth. Even when the Canadian government took steps towards creating a more equitable society through the closure of residential schools and amendments to the Indian Act, Canadian society failed to mirror this progress. As Talaga illustrates through all of the children in the book, Indigenous youth continued to endure racism and discrimination within Canadian society, especially in Thunder Bay, the city closest to Indigenous reserves. Many Indigenous students who enter Thunder Bay are often treated every day like outcasts and with great suspicion. (141) Talaga depicts this through the complaints of the indigenous youth: “We would get egged by white kids,” James says. “People would yell out of passing cars, ‘Go back home! Go back to your land!’” he recalls. “Meanwhile, this is our land.” (141) These children, who have just come to Thunder Bay to pursue education, are faced with constant racist remarks and prejudiced behaviour. Even when complaining to the police, they would be ignored or not taken seriously, forcing these children to silently put up with the abuse. These are not even historical cases, as many date past the 2000’s. Talaga uses these examples to show the lack of change in Indigenous society, highlighting Indigenous women in this specific case “She waved for help, but the car didn’t stop. Instead, it slowed down and pulled up beside the girls and someone threw leftover McDonald’s food and wrappers at them… She’d been living in Thunder Bay for months now and was used to this kind of treatment.” (185) The fact that Indigenous youth had grown accustomed to this treatment after months of living in Thunder Bay further highlighted the dehumanization endured by Indigenous youths. Talaga emphasizes this fact by using Statistics Canada to show that Thunder Bay has the highest crime rate in the country, making it the crime capital of Canada. (233) Darryl Kakekayash, a 16-year-old kid who underwent significant physical abuse, is another tragic example: “… [He] was beaten severely and tossed into the Neebing River.” (233) This incident shows the increased violence and abuse towards Indigenous people. Talaga shows through these incidents the brutality and violence to which Indigenous youth are subjected on a daily basis. The normalization of mistreatment and the alarming crime rates in places like Thunder Bay show that even when systemic issues have been amended, communities are still racially profiled and marginalized by society.

	Indigenous people are confronted not only by increased racism but also systemic biases within the justice system. When Indigenous individuals find themselves marginalized and vulnerable by Canadian society, they are also betrayed by the very institutions meant to uphold justice, including the Thunder Bay Police. This systemic prejudice within the justice system compounds the challenges faced by Indigenous youth, as they face prejudice in every aspect of their lives in Thunder Bay. As seen in Talaga’s descriptions, many of the community’s problems are caused by the Thunder Bay police, both directly and indirectly. One key example in the book is Skye Kakegamic, Robyn Harper’s friend and a victim of police brutality. “Suddenly he was handcuffing her and yanking her long black hair. He spun her around and slammed her head against the top of the police car…The cops were laughing, making fun of her. They began to draw exaggerated images of a native and called her a savage.” (188) This injustice that was inflicted upon Skye, who had done nothing wrong, caused her immense trauma that would have lasting consequences. When Robyn found herself unconscious one night due to alcohol, Skye might have sought help from the police. However, due to the trauma she endured, Skye hesitated, inadvertently leaving Robyn’s conditions unchecked. While this may not have been the sole reason for Robyn’s death, it could have been a contributing factor that potentially prevented it. The police have been noted by Talaga as having a history of overlooking Indigenous concerns. They have been inconsistent in notifying the families of the deceased, often assuming the cause of death to be accidental several days later without a thorough autopsy. Additionally, they have displayed a lack of urgency in cases involving missing Indigenous individuals, issuing missing person warrants only weeks after the initial report. “‘Our community has no confidence in the police,’ Fiddler said. ‘Police have done no better investigating Tammy’s death, accepting drowning as the cause but failing to determine how she ended up in the water.’” (309) Thunder Bay police have become so unreliable in their response to Indigenous issues that the communities have had to take matters into their own hands, investing significant efforts and resources into searching for and locating these missing students, filling the void left by the inadequate police response, and further eroding trust between the Indigenous community and the very institutions meant to protect them. The article from Statistics Canada claims that in 2018, police services operating in areas with a majority Indigenous population reported a staggering overall crime rate of 30,333 incidents per 100,000 people. As seen in the chart below, it is six times higher than the rate of 5,191 incidents per 100,000 reported by police, where the majority are non-Indigenous. More than 90% of police services in Indigenous regions reported crime rates exceeding the national average, with 147 of them reporting rates more than twice the national rate. The rates for all types of crimes were higher compared to non-Indigenous communities, except for certain property crimes (Statistics Canada, 2020). The disproportionately high crime rates in Indigenous communities highlight the injustice faced by Indigenous populations. It is evident that the systemic challenges and marginalization faced by Indigenous people in Canada are not an issue of the past, but a major problem that is still occurring today. As the Indigenous people try to improve their communities and relationships with Canada, they are faced with challenges in every aspect of their lives. 

	
	Despite Canada’s reputation as a representation of peace and inclusion, the country is continuously dealing with systemic issues that continue to affect Indigenous communities today. Talagas’ stories shed light on the realities of how Canada handles its most vulnerable citizens. Talaga's stories reveal the impact of racism, historical injustices, and long-term trauma on Indigenous communities. The scars of colonization are still felt in organizations, policies, and cultural structures that contain hints of discrimination and exclusion. Unconscious biases in encounters change perceptions and reinforce prejudice towards Indigenous people. Government policies and social biases present major obstacles for communities, resulting in negative consequences in many parts of their lives. Despite efforts to improve, Canada’s relationship with Indigenous peoples will remain unchanged as long as the scars remain within the Indigenous community.


Reflection: 
I have learned a lot from this writing process. It has helped me a lot with the planning the structure and points of my essay. For the first time, I am actually satisfied with the essay that I have written, as it includes most of the points that i have wanted to add without ruining the flow of the essay. The peer review and the writing conference have also given me the opportunity to see how others view my writing. This efficient writing process has worked so well for me that I may use it for all my essays in the future. 





Citations
Allen, Mary. Crime Reported by Police Serving Areas Where the Majority of the Population Is Indigenous, 2018, Government of Canada, Statistics Canada, 18 Nov. 2020, www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/85-002-x/2020001/article/00013-eng.htm.
Talaga, Tanya. Seven Fallen Feathers: Racism, Death, and Hard Truths in a Northern City. Scribe Publications, 2021.
Wilson, Kory. “Indigenization Guide: The Indian Act.” BCcampus, 1 Feb. 2021, bccampus.ca/2020/04/14/indigenization-guide-the-indian-act/. 
