





Minor Prophets:
Nahum
Summary

















REL20A 
Damian Wong 10B
Sep 30, 2022
Q1: The book Nahum is included in the Books of Prophecy. More specifically the Minor Prophets.
Q2: The book’s author was Nahum
Q3: The book was written between 613 - 612 BC
Q4: It is written for the israelite people and to God's people, as a warning and a book of judgment. A warning so we as God’s people will not make the same mistake, justice for the israelite people because they will know that God is protecting his people.
Q5: (ESV Bible)
Opening (Nahum 1) - Nahum starts with praising the Lord describing that no one can stand before his wrath, as nature itself is how he shows us his omnipotent powers. The Lord is nice to his people, but will not hesitate to punish us if we commit sin, as his wrath is only defense against his word and people. However our Lord is merciful and is slow to anger, this explains the slow judgment upon the sin, as he counts this as the innocent losing their way. 
Destruction of Nineveh (Nahum 2) - This section explains the fall of Nineveh, and The Lords reason for judgment. The city of Nieveh was a city full of sin that treated people and God’s people very badly. However they repented after Jonah’s warning, and they were forgiven. But they chose to sin again there for they were punished. The army that invaded Nineveh was made up of Medes and Babylonians, and possibly Scythians. Due to the unsuccessful invasion because of the wall they came up with a very good plan. As the Khoser River runs through the city, they closed off the water source by using a gate creating a dam. After waiting for till the dam fills up, they opened the gate causing the water to crash into the walls, thereby causing Nineveh to collapse.
Conclusion (Nahum 3) - Nahum 3 repetes most of the things above and emphasizes Lord's coming judgment. God’s judgment was because of wickedness and sin of the Nineveh people. His prophecy said that Nineveh will perish if they don’t change their ways, and thus Nineveh fell. 
												         
Q6: (Esv Bible)
The theme of this book is the destruction of Nineveh and the Lord's judgment. It serves as a warning to man and the Lord’s people that although God is merciful, if you do not heed his warnings he will bring judgment. This also serves as a blessing as we can confirm that God will protect his people and will give judgment to those who sin and hurt God’s people. This passage Nah 1:15 was mentioned in Rom 10:15.
Q7: 
Did the Lord help with the invasion other than a prophecy? If so then how?
Since the bible is still new to me, are there other stories of God's judgment? 
Even though Nineveh has already repented and was forgiven, why did they commit sin again? 
Q8: 
What I learned from the book was very interesting. Most importantly God is very merciful and is slow to pass judgment. This gives us time to repent our mistakes and to correct them so we don’t do them again. However if you sin multiple times and don’t heed the Lords warning he will pass harsh judgment. I was also surprised that the entire city was destroyed, I am sure that there will always be at least some good in that city. It teaches me that the Lord will always give us a chance to repent and change our ways, and give us warnings so we can learn. But if we don’t learn he will pass a harder judgment until we learn. 








Work cited
“Esv.org.” ESV Bible, 2001, https://www.esv.org/. 
