Role:	a poor child 
Audience: bennet 
Form:	letter 
Topic: A poor child asking Prime Minister Bennett for help

…	…	…	…	…	…	…	…	…	…	…	…	…

Markum, ON 
Feb 28 1936
Dear president Bennet 
Hi, I am a 12 year old boy. I live with a family of four, including my parents, my sister, and my younger brother. Ever since 1933, the unemployment rate has increased to 50% in my area, and my parents have had no source of income, leaving us barely scraping by with only one meal a day, surviving off of mashed potatoes and canned peas and tuna; occasionally, a rat would run by, providing us with another meal that day. Although I am grateful for having to be able to eat at all, with my friends barely being able to get food once a day. The relief camps didn’t help much either, providing us with only 20¢ a day. Especially with five mouths to feed, even with both me, my mom, and my sister helping, 80¢ can’t really provide us much. We had hoped that the conditions and pay would have gotten better over time, but it didn’t seem likely after a few years. That is why my father joined the Regina riot, yet it didn’t seem to do much; the pay and the conditions were still the same even after the riot. I really hope that you will have the power to change this, especially with the grasshopper storm, because a lot of us came back with sickness and injuries. With the dust bowl and grasshoppers, food has become scarce, and with farmers abandoning their farms, food prices have increased exponentially. So now we would be lucky if we even forgot 4 times a week. Because of this, my sister has become ill due to the poor conditions and lack of food. I hope that if I write to you, you will be so kind as to provide us with some money to be able to afford some medicine, hopefully helping her recover soon. If not,then we will need our little brother to help us, while we save money by eating twice a week to have enough money to afford medicine. I hope that I can hear from you soon, since her health is declining by the day. 
Your dear friend 
Donald Duck 
