Name of revisor #1: Damian

Photo 3 (Peggy’s Cove): 
There is a sky so white, you can nearly feel your retinas burning. It's a fog so thick, so cloudy, it's seeping into your mind, clouding it full of a hazy mist. It all seems a little bit too overwhelming, almost. How much the sky reaches and covers everything it can see, wrapping it in that heavy blanket of fog. The earth you’re standing on, it is rocky, poking out from the earth like hands trying to reach you, to grab you. That sort of mist, it's dripping onto you and sticking, like you’ve been caught in a spiderweb and are being spun around in it (the description of the spinning around don’t make too much sense. You can say that “...you’ve been caught in a spiderweb, wrapped in an inescapable cocoon” but the description should fit the feeling of mist better). It seems ethereal, almost, like you’ve been taken out of your body and you’re in a place that isn’t anywhere, separate from earth, from space, from anywhere else. Are you in the afterlife, perhaps? You can’t let go of that feeling of numbness, of dissociation, like your body is moving on its own, taken by the grasp of this spell-bound place. Yet it is calming, even with this rift in (within) yourself, as your soul gets to rest. The scene is melancholic, hopeful, and (yet) hopeless (may not be useful sentence). In the distance, those small little black dots seem to be stumbling around, as confused and unknowingly as you are. How did you get to this place? Those thunderous ocean waves could almost wake you up, crashing and ramming into the rocks at shore, splashing the noise into your ears. You feel as if this place might not be on earth, as if you’ve died and now your soul is simply wandering here, in a sort of blissful oblivion. You kind of like imagining it like that (this sentence is not really connected to the next). Maybe if you were a tiny creature, you might’ve been able to grab onto and climb up all that dense fog like a rope, pulling yourself up to heaven perhaps. (you can describe the feeling of this sudden change. What did you feel when this happened)Suddenly, you are much more aware of the presence of your soul, and a sense of peace, of acceptance passes through you as if a spirit has walked right past you and placed a fading hand on your shoulder. (maybe aldo describe that the beam of light from the lighthouse shown through the fog to you. This makes it more coherent with the paragraph instead of just spawning a lighthouse in the distance) Serenity and similarity gives way to a shimmering lighthouse, proud and tall. A bright light shining from the top, you feel mesmerized by it. The people seem to be heading there, spirits being guided towards the afterlife, maybe. You feel a slight tug, something pulling your spirit to it and walk forwards. Your feet, your legs, they begin moving on their own, like they’re still detached, separate parts of you acting on their own. Your mind is still so hypnotized by the tower and your soul still feels that tug beckoning you to it. Those bumpy rocks will be no obstacle in your path. You will make it there. You will reach the lighthouse, you think… you’ll make it to Peggy’s cove.
lot of sight, feel, sound, but you can add some taste or smell
Really good paragraph, very detailed and descriptions that make it feel very real. Though it may be too long considering the parameters of the assignment. There are some sentences that may be unnecessary as it describes the same sense in the same way as other sentences

Photo 5 - Fishing Dory 
(since it is so personal consider making it first person)
This rusty boat has seen itself on many travels. It has gone to places, and people, and experiences you haven’t even known. This old, humble boat has served you quite well, and it’s difficult to say goodbye (you can use sensory elements to describe how you felt). You know this boat has been through as much toil and struggle as you. You place your hand on it softly, as if you were solemnly standing at the grave of an old friend (maybe include more sense of touch here in this sentence). This discolored, teal boat has done so much for you, and your grandchildren as well. You remember all those fishing trips, all those times waiting and waiting and staring (avoid having repeating and’s “...fishing trips, all those times waiting and waiting, staring at…” grammatically more correct)at those murky waters just waiting for something to change, to happen. Some days you’d come back with nothing except time gone, spent well, and on occasion, other days you’d be grinning widely with the fattest fish in your hands (you could describe the fish more, with the sense of touch and sight), proudly presenting it to your grandchildren like you’ve just won the lottery. You pass your hand over the splintered scars on the hull, and the memories of all those moments come flowing back into you, not harshly, but a steady stream of water flowing into your cup, into the space inside your skull (maybe rephrase into 2 sentences the sentence is too long). You look up, only to see blurry hazes, a fog covering those fancy electric boats blowing away (maybe use stronger sensory detail). You don’t need all that luxury or technology. This simple boat, your fishing gear, and some oars is all you need (maybe make this more reflective tone as you are looking back at the past). You wish others would live more simply as well, be more humble rather than going out partying on those exorbitant yachts or dragging fish by the netfull with commercial fishing boats (reflection). You quietly think to yourself that people these days have forgotten how to slow down, to observe and take life in one detail, one glance, one step at a time. Now everyone is running back and forth and no one can stop for one second to just be, to take life in their hands and cradle it gently, holding it for a second, without distraction. Despite your mournful longing for those simpler times, having those memories from this boat gives you some peace (describing this more will give the sentence more impact). Peace that’s harder to find now. There’s a blue rope holding on the boat, anchoring it and keeping it still. There’s a sort of “Trust me, I will keep you steady.” whispered from the rope to the boat, and you can nearly hear it. Tiny, miniscule grains lay still beneath your feet, sleeping and slumbering soundly. Taking steps, that crushing, sifting sound of gravel moving around, rearranging itself and being pushed away plays, as if they were crying out to you. There is a soft whirring on the water, broken by loud, blaring boat horns. And maybe your elderly ears can make out a tiny bit of paddling, someone scooping the ocean with their paddles as if it were a big bowl of life and they were merely just a speck on the surface (maybe add more sentimental significance to the paddy). A kindred soul, related to you somehow. Perhaps they’ve also a pinch of weariness, slowly gliding along the water searching for something they know they can’t find among the waters. It’s time to go now, you remind yourself. The people who need you are waiting. You take a step away, nostalgia. Another step, wistfulness. The third step, bittersweet. And then you begin walking away. Maybe one more trip, you think. Maybe we can go on another trip someday…to go fishing with Dory again. 
Really enjoyed this description, could emphasize on impact more on some areas
Could be more reflective in some areas to make a larger contrast from the old to the new
Best one out of all 3 paragraphs
Could add more sense of smell

Photo 1 - Old Wife 
You’ve been here before, haven’t you? That shape..those rocky fingers pointing up, greeting the sky…it feels familiar. Maybe in a dream, you’ve seen it before, the feeling is on the tip of your tongue, but you can’t quite make it out. You’re confusing the sky with the sea, it’s like this sort of balanced, calm type of blueish green, turquoise, you might call it (instead of listing out colors you can add more sensory descriptions). Those rock formations… a familiar face (what makes it familiar), you think. You want to say hello to it again, but you don’t remember its name (could make it more wishful). You can’t tell if it’s inviting you or not, but its reflection is staring back at you in the shallow pools of water on the ground. Where it came from, you have no idea (could add some more details to make it more mysterious). It's giving you a bit of an urge, you have this thought, that you want to go forth and climb this sharp, jagged structure and go on the top of it, on the sides, and all around it, examining it and figuring it out. Maybe all those bits and pieces scattered across the ground were once pieces of it, parts of the puzzle. You can sense its loneliness (could add a metaphor to add more impact). The weather has not been kind to this one, it has left them bruised, a bit shaken, but you know them better, you know how strong they are, even with all the scars now. They’re still standing, amidst all that they’ve lost. It’s been far too long since you’ve last been here. You want to apologize for not having visited, but the words do not come. The colors nearly mimic the smell of coffee, you think. Rich and earthy. A bit rough, but sturdy. A good, dependable one. Meeting it again, you can see some faint remnants of times now past on the ground, detached from them. They’ve changed, haven’t they? Yet they’re still the same, when you first met them. Stood straight, their tip piercing the color penciled sky. You can sense a twinge of regret, bitterness, and saltiness within them (could expand on the emotion with sensory detail). You wish you could pour your heart out onto them, to tell them you wish you had been there with them the whole time, to pick up those pieces and put them back together how they were. So much has changed, and now you’re in the aftermath. In the water, you can see their true emotions. It’s difficult for them, seeing you again after so long. They’ve been left stranded here, alone, with time chipping away at it without pause. There are fuzzy, white shapes far behind it, watching you two stare at anything but each other, judging silently and waiting to see what’ll happen next, like a nosy neighbor across the street. You take a deep breath and sigh, sensing the slightest of dust and rock, and begin to talk with them. It’s time to reconcile. To make up for all the time that has passed, for your old wife. 
Included all the senses but could have more if possible taste and smell