
Canada has a reputation as one of the nicest and most peaceful countries in the world; however, despite decades of efforts to confront its dark past, Canada continues to face the systemic issues that affect Indigenous communities to this day. Mahatma Gandhi once said, "The true measure of any society can be found in how it treats its most vulnerable members." When considering Canada's treatment of Indigenous people, its reputation doesn’t match up to the stories that are still shared by the indigenous communities today, creating room to reevaluate if Canada can be considered as such. In the book Seven Fallen Feathers, Tanya Talaga investigates the tragic deaths of seven Indigenous students in Canada. Talaga explores systemic racism, historical injustices, and intergenerational trauma through the deaths of the children in the book Seven Fallen Feathers. While using these stories to shed light on the problems faced by indigenous communities and the systematic racism still faced by indigenous communities today. Through this book, Talaga exposes the lack of accountability and parasitic relationship between the Canadian government and indigenous society. 

	This systematic injustice dates back to the very founding of Canada as a nation. The Indian Act, first introduced in 1876, consolidated various colonial laws aimed at controlling and assimilating Indigenous peoples into Euro-Canadian culture. “... the Indian Act, with its limitations on freedom of movement and even pursuit of education.” (59) This legislation stripped Indigenous communities of their autonomy, outlawed cultural practices, restricted them to reserves, and prohibited residential schooling, which was the most devastating to the indigenous culture. Residential schools caused lasting scars among the indigenous communities, as children from a young age got removed from their parents and culture, were physically abused, and lived in filthy conditions. “Many of the complaints centered around excessive corporal punishment - children were routinely beaten with leather straps…” (71) Children in indigenous schools were often beaten, harshly punished, and sometimes even sexually harassed. Conditions became so horrible that many started running away. One case that is better known is the death of a child named Chanie Wenjack. He ran away from Cecilia Jeffrey Indian Residential School when he was 12. As he was unable to withstand the abuse he was receiving, he escaped from Cecilia Jeffrey in the hope of reuniting with his family. It was a journey over 600 kilometres, but like many others who tried, Chanie also tragically died, succumbing to hypothermia. (can show how complaints are ignored by government)However, despite all this, it is considered fortunate that children made it out alive in the first place. “... there was even one complaint that a student died after being severely punished by the principal." (71) Talaga shows systemic violence and neglect embedded within the residential school system. As even when there are complaints of the horrible things done by indigenous schools, complaints of abuse and mistreatment were routinely ignored or dismissed by government authorities.  

Even after decades, this act continues to affect the indigenous community. There are many systematic issues still contained within the Indian Act, like how it once discriminated against Indigenous women, stripping them of their status if they married non-Indigenous men. While this was amended in 1985 with Bill C-31, the legacy of this discrimination persists. As the BCcampus article states, "The oppression of First Nations women under the Indian Act resulted in long-term poverty, marginalization and violence, which they are still trying to overcome today." (Wilson) This shows that despite Canada's efforts to rectify past wrongs, the Indian Act's lasting impacts serve as a reminder of the deep-seated systemic inequalities that continue to affect Indigenous peoples. 

While the closure of the final residential school in 1997 marked the end of an era tainted by systematic injustice, it also signalled the beginning of a cycle of intergenerational trauma, and prejudice that would soon affect indigenous youth. Even when the Canadian government took steps towards creating a more equitable society through the closure of residential schools and amendments to the Indian Act, Canadian society failed to mirror this progress. As Talaga illustrates through all of the children in the book, Indigenous youth continued to endure racism and discrimination within Canadian society, especially in Thunder Bay, the city closest to indigenous reserves. As children enter the city, they are faced with undeserved hate, prejudice and subjected to cruel actions from strangers (maybe focus on Robyn). “She waved for help, but the car didn’t stop. Instead, it slowed down and pulled up beside the girls and someone threw leftover McDonald’s food and wrappers at them…  She’d been living in Thunder Bay for months now and was used to this kind of treatment.” (185) The fact that indigenous youth had grown accustomed to this treatment after months of living in Thunder Bay further highlighted the dehumanization endured by Indigenous youths. Talaga emphasizes this fact by using Statistics Canada to show that Thunder Bay has the highest crime rate in the country, making it the crime capital of Canada. (268) Darryl Kakekayash, a 16-year-old kid who underwent significant physical abuse, is another tragic example: “… [He] was beaten severely and tossed into the Neebing River.” (233) This incident shows the increased violence and abuse towards indigenous people. Talaga shows through these incidents the brutality and violence to which Indigenous youth are subjected on a daily basis. The normalization of mistreatment and the alarming crime rates in places like Thunder Bay show that even when systematic issues have been amended, communities are still racially profiled and marginalized by society. (can include more examples here) 

Indigenous people are confronted not only by increased racism but also by systemic biases within the justice system. When Indigenous individuals find themselves marginalized and vulnerable by Canadian society, they are also betrayed by the very institutions meant to uphold justice, including the Thunder Bay police. This systemic prejudice within the justice system compounds the challenges faced by Indigenous youth, as they face prejudice in every aspect of their lives in Thunder Bay. As seen in Talaga’s descriptions, many of the children’s troubles are caused by the Thunder Bay police, both directly and indirectly. One key example in the book is Skye, Robyn Harper’s friend, and a victim of police brutality. “Suddenly he was handcuffing her and yanking her long black hair. He spun her around and slammed her head against the top of the police car…The cops were laughing, making fun of her. They began to draw exaggerated images of a native and called her a savage.” (188) This injustice that was inflicted upon Skye, who had done nothing wrong, caused her immense trauma that would have lasting consequences. When Robyn found herself unconscious one night due to alcohol, Skye might have sought help from the police. However, due to the trauma she endured, Skye hesitated, inadvertently leaving Robyn's conditions unchecked. While this may not have been the sole reason for Robyn's death, it could have been a contributing factor that potentially prevented it. 
The police have been noted by Talaga as having a history of overlooking indigenous concerns. They have been inconsistent in notifying the families of the deceased, often assuming the cause of death to be accidental several days later without conducting a thorough autopsy. Additionally, they have displayed a lack of urgency in cases involving missing indigenous individuals, issuing missing person warrants only weeks after the initial report. Thunder Bay police have become so unreliable in their response to Indigenous issues that the community has had to take matters into their own hands, investing significant effort and resources into searching for and locating these missing students, filling the void left by the inadequate police response, and further eroding trust between the Indigenous community and the very institutions meant to protect them. The article from Statistics Canada claims that in 2018 police services operating in areas with a majority Indigenous population reported a staggering overall crime rate of 30,333 incidents per 100,000 people.. As seen in the cart below it is six times higher than the rate of 5,191 incidents per 100,000 reported by police in communities where the majority's non Indigenous. More than 90% of police services in Indigenous regions reported crime rates exceeding the national average with 147 of them reporting rates more than twice the national rate. The rates for all types of crimes were higher in communities compared to non Indigenous ones except for certain property crimes. () The disproportionately high crime rates in Indigenous communities highlight the injustice faced by the Indigenous population. This is evident that the systemic challenges and marginalization faced by Indigenous peoples in Canada is not an issue of the past, but an major problem that is still occurring today. As the indigenous people try to improve their communities and relationships with Canada, they are faced with challenges on every aspect of their lives. 



Given the severe prejudice and hostility experienced by indigenous children, it comes as no surprise that many struggle to maintain a positive outlook and turned to self-destructive coping mechanisms. For some, this leads a descent into a dark path of addiction, such as drugs and alcohol. Talaga expresses this in the book through the many children 

(include paragraph on police brutality.) 
(include paragraph on addictions.)
(may include a paragraph on suicide)

Despite Canada's reputation as a beacon of peace and inclusion, the country is continuously dealing with systemic issues that continue to affect communities today. Talagas' stories shed light on the realities of how Canada handles its most vulnerable citizens. Talagas narratives reveal the impact of racism, historical injustices, and long-term trauma on Indigenous communities today. The scars of colonization are still felt in organizations, policies, and cultural structures that perpetuate discrimination and exclusion. Unconscious biases in encounters shape perceptions and reinforce prejudices toward Indigenous people. Government policies and social biases present obstacles for communities, resulting in negative consequences in many parts of their lives Despite efforts to improve, Canada's relationship with Indigenous peoples remains unchanged as long as the scars remain within the indigenous community. 


	

Citations 
Wilson, Kory. "Indigenization Guide: The Indian Act." BCcampus, 14 Apr. 2020, bccampus.ca/2020/04/14/indigenization-guide-the-indian-act/.