conspiracy theories and other dumb stuff episode #1 :BIRDS ARE BAD

rebekah
ethan 
percy 
damian
(we can change if people want)

Have you seen dead birds on the ground? 
Of course not. We’ll tell you why. Hi, we are the No Life Dudes and we touch grass! 
Right now, we will tell you why birds were dead for a long time, and the birds are now drone spies (ominous pause)  for the bad guys. 
Have you seen dead or kid birds on the ground? Of course not. Why would you, they are not real.
In the time when snakes had legs and the cheese moon had just crashed on Mars, the birds died the same way as the snakes with legs when they burned to death. So the bad guys made the drone birds to spy on us. 
Now you might think: where will the bird drones get their life source? How will these drones charge? 
Well where do you see birds land? The fake trees, of course, what else would they land on? Real trees? No way.
Real trees burned the same day as the snakes with legs did..These trees charge the birds once the birds land on them. 
You might ask us, how can we breathe since there’s no trees? Well, at night, when you sleep, the bad guys make fake air that you can breathe in and put it in your nose so that you can breathe for a day.
Since the fake air lasts for one day, the bad guys will do the same thing each night.  
Also since the earth is flat, this helps the bad guys spread the bird drones more fast. Don’t ask us how that works. We don’t know. 
On this note you should go check out our talk shows where we talk on why the earth is flat. 
So, lets go back to what we said. The part where we said birds are fake. Here is what you should do if you don’t think what we say is true. I say you shall go to the back of your house. Crouch down and look at the grass. You should see some small folks with wings. These folks can tell you that we speak the truth.
These folks have been in the world for a long time and they have seen a lot of stuff, like the bad guys who made the bird drones.
But, we warn you! The small folks with wings are hard to spot. They are real small, your eyes can’t see them. In fact, you must close your eyes and sleep to see them. I know this does not make sense, but once you try it out, you’ll know it works.  
Well this is why birds are fake. Dare think our words are false, and you will be forced to deal with bird drones. Tune in next time on the nolifedudes.com to hear us say why flu shots will kill you due to bits of bad stuff in it that is made by bad guys, and why your mom (plays radio static) 