Approach to Learning: Curiosity, enthusiasm to learn, ability to teach others, etc. 

One of my passions is learning new things, the things in this world that I can explore brings me joy doing it. There usually isn’t anything that I would not be curious to learn. I learn by understanding and analyzing how things work. It never satisfies me if I am just handed the answer, only when I use my own knowledge and power to complete it brings me satisfaction no matter how small the problem is. This means I also love challenges. My ability to teach it fairly well. I am already working on Sundays, and my work as an assistant coach. This winter I am also working as a snowboard coach. I love to spread my knowledge with other people. It makes me very happy to see people learn and do well after I teach them. I also have received some very positive feedback and good reviews from my students and parents. 

Personal Accomplishments: Extracurricular involvement, work experience, entrepreneurship, volunteerism, etc.

I work as an assistant coach for robotics, and teach snowboarding. I have gotten into the top 30 in the world for VEX robotics. Traveled to different countries learning 4 different languages along the way. 

Communication Skills: Both oral and written, motivational ability, public speaking skills, etc.

I am very good at leading and convincing others. I have been very social when i was a child and even now. It was the only way I would have survived moving to 4 different countries. I do extremely well with people but i don’t really know how to explain it. However i may be a little shy in front of large crowds

Creativity: Originality, innovation, artistic/musical ability, problem solving skills, etc.

I love problem solving as seen in robotics, math, science ets. 

Ability to work with others: Collaboration, leadership roles, engagement, supportive, respectful, etc.

In my groups I usually take up the leadership role. I see that many people can’t handle their time and collaboration, so I organize the group so it is more efficient. Our group usually does very well, and the team members are happy because they have their voices heard. I believe that only by supporting the people that help you would they be more helpful then if they are not happy.

Maturity: Independence, self-awareness, time management, adaptability, etc.  

