I have always been aware of poverty before watching this video. As a young child, I lived in China during the midst of development. I saw how fortunate I was, and how much people struggled. Even today I still see people living on the streets in the wealthiest countries. Though I had always known that poverty was always a cause and effect, I had always thought that poverty was always because they did not use their chances correctly and were like lost sheep that was never helped, so it was always their fault. I have seen many examples of that even in my family. People have gambled their lives away or lost everything because of drugs and alcohol. That is why I was seeing so much poverty in such wealthy countries. How my views were not complete and this video made me realize that I had only half the truth.
	In this video, I learned that poverty was far beyond what I had perceived before. It showed me that it wasn’t just people making bad choices. But it was also people that didn’t have a chance and were not given help by wealthier countries. They were born in poverty and push themselves to get one meal a day. In rare cases sending their kids to school so that they can have a better life than what they have now. I now feel pity towards these kinds of people, and it makes me feel the need to help people weaker than us, as one of God’s people. Poverty could have been solved already, as we are producing enough food to feed everyone on the planet. But the greed of governments and more prominent corporations have prevented us from doing that, and even taking advantage of the poor, which ironically make most of our food. 
	Some of the people living on the street are indeed their fault. But many other factors have interfered with this cause, in that poverty also has to do with the economy. To quote Mr.Choi “The government is a scam” which I completely agree with. Usually in wealthy countries poverty is because of drug addiction and alcoholism. Governments are not banning drugs and alcohol for the good of their people. But are actively unbanning drugs because it earned them the most money. They are not unable to stop this but are unwilling to stop this problem as this would stop their biggest income. Canada has earned over 38 billion dollars in revenue just on alcohol and drugs. In Vancouver they have created a policy known as “harm reduction”, it is said to prevent and lessen the harm addicted users have on the economy. However very little was done to prevent, treat or enforce addiction-related issues. In 2003 Vancouver opened their first government-supervised drug injection site. The government is not only not using its full power to keep its citizens safe from substances but is promoting it to its long-term “customers” and hiding it behind a smoked screen. As governments, they have the responsibility to help their citizens that are actually in poverty, living with barely one meal a day instead of pretending like you are and putting people in more debt and despair. 
	As seen in the documentary some people are living on a dollar a day. As we richer economies, I believe that it is our responsibility to help them. Not only will we be a widely appreciated community, but we can start advancing our society as a whole. There is a quote by Thomas Reid “a chain is no stronger than its weakest link”. And I believe that it is very true, when we think about advancing society it is not just about advancing ourselves, but also advancing the people around us that are not as well off as us. By helping them we are helping our society as a whole to advance beyond what we are now. To be able to help poor countries, they must first have a very strong government. In China, even though people are living in poverty and on the streets, people still aren't starving to death and still have a healthy diet. This is because of the support from the government. Governments have the power to raise their country from the ground, but also leave it in ruins. The only way we would be able to support them would be to send funds or create a strong government that makes decisions in that country for their people and not for greed. 
	This documentary has opened my eyes and made me think about this situation from a broader perspective. It seems that this was a bigger problem than I might have thought. There are a lot of other issues that many people are focused on, and might not realize that this is such a big issue. Even though what I try to do to help might be insignificant, I believe that just knowing that this is a big problem, and spreading the word would be sufficient enough for now. 
