Essential question: why does it matter who tells your story and how?
Historical background of Hamilton 

Takes place back in 1700
1755-1804	
Historical genre

1757 - Hamilton was born on an island
1804 - died
Two party system 
No political parties existed within the US until Washington’s Presidency
Disagreements over the interpretation of the Constitution and the power of the national
Parties have changed over time 
Federalists 
Lead by hamilton (Represents New York → north ppl)
Loose
Wanted a financially sound and strong nationalistic government 
Want federal government to have more power, instead of provincial government
Strong following in the north 
Democratic republicans
Lead by Thomas Jefferson (Represents the state of Virginia → south ppl) 
Strict interpretations of constitution
Noc hanges/ follow what is there/ the constitution is good as it is 
Jefferson wrote the morst constitution, he likes what he wrote
Opposed a strong national government and hamilton financial plan 
Wanted more power to the provincial government
Interest of the south 
Economic perspective
Us was in major debt from war
Borrowed money from france
Ham’s plan was to fix the debt by having the national government assume all state debts
New york was in a lot of debt
Create a central, national bank
Government not given express power for this in constitution
Opposed by D-Rs
Issues
Virginia was in less debt then new york, (did not want to take the debt of northern states)
French Revolution
Country (US) split 
D-Rs: PRO France
F: PRO England (Trade)
Franco-American Alliance of 1778

Federalist Papers
85 essays written to promote ratification of the US Constitution
(First public relations/media campaign)
Does not want:
Over-dominant central authority
Instability via loose alliance
Balance of power (fedral government to be balanced by states and vice versa)
Avoid strong political factions (divisive)
Jefferson 
Made money through farming
Hailton 
Made money through trade

Media Literacy is “the ability to ACCESS, ANALYZE, EVALUATE, CREATE, and ACT using all forms of communication.”
Vocabulary 
Tier 2
Confirmation bias: to make outcome to your hypothesis
Stereotyping: thinking a characteristic of a group of people is the same
Unconscious bias: making bias without notice 
Ethics: rational judgement for our moral intuitions
Journalistic integrity: appeal of honesty in journalism
Inclusivity: to include all people, welcoming 
Normative: everything is in regular, average, normal way
Social media:  the means of interactions among people in which they create, share, and/or exchange information and ideas in virtual communities and networks.
Tier 3
Memes
Cancel Culture
Influencer
Viral
Media literacy is the ability to…
ACCESS
ANALYZE
EVALUATE
Relevance
Accuracy
Bias
Reliability
CREATE
ACT 
Using all forms of communication.
5 Questions of media literacy (key)
1. Who created the message? (Also: Who paid for this message?)
2. Which techniques are used to attract my attention?
3. How might different people interpret this message?
4. Which lifestyles, values, and points of view are represented or missing?
5. Why is this message being sent?

ethos logos pathos

Logos appeals to the audience's reason, building up logical arguments.
Ethos appeals to the speaker's status or authority, making the audience more likely to trust them.
Pathos appeals to the emotions, trying to make the audience feel angry or sympathetic.