Why do Consumers Buy?
There are six key factors that influence buying decisions of consumers:
 Income & Price 

Lower income families spend a larger portion of its income on basic necessities. 
Families with small children, or aging grandparents, spend differently.
Higher income families spend more on luxury items (non needs) like travel, health & wellness, entertainment and recreation.
If more people moved into the higher income bracket and there was no change in the supply of luxury goods, what would happen to their price?



Status

Conspicuous consumption:  people buy to impress others.  Remember Veblen Goods – they are more in demand as prices INCREASE. 
Luxury cars, big homes, fancy vacations, labelled clothing all feed into this type of consumption.
Some/many buy these even when they are not able to afford them (borrow).
Record several purchases among teens give the appearance of status:



Current Trends 

Staying in style motivates purchasing.
Adult and child peer pressure dictates choices.  This also can be very costly.
Many items go out of style quickly.  
Record four different and unrelated items here:

Customs & Habits 

Family, religion, customs, habits, culture, and community associations all direct and influence purchases.
How is a generally secular society influenced by religious Holidays?	


How might habits influence purchases?




Safety

Product safety has become an enormous issue in our society.
The Canadian Standards Association (CSA) is a not-for-profit organization involved with developing safety standards and certify products.
Record at least four items that you believe must be CSA approved in order to be sold in Canadian stores?


Promotion

No one is immune to the power of business advertising.  It is all around us.  Advertising and promotional techniques are also becoming more sophisticated.  
Lifestyle advertising uses what appears to be successful, happy, good looking people using a particular product.
What message does this convey?

YouTube Video:  Why Consumers Can’t Avoid Unplanned Purchases  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rYoTX-0q0yY
Dr. Rosallina Ferraro, University of Maryland


Watch the video and answer the following questions:
 What is “In-Store Marketing”?  Provide several examples.

adds on the floor
aroma
coupons 
layout 
deals
how they are displayed 


How can consumers avoid unnecessary and unplanned purchases?
come in with a list
limiting where you go
how much time 
payment method 
how frequently 
how much time you go. 
Taking Care of Business

Three factors determine HOW customers buy:
time spent in a store
the most important factor. keeping shoppers in a store increased the chance of a sale
what do companies do to keep customers in stores and shopping
contact time
how much time is a customer spending with an employee? this constitutes contact time. contact time is also called the interaction rate. the more contact, the more sales that are made.
What balance must employees keep in order to keep customers informed and feeling assisted, but not overwhelmed?


E-Commerce
YouTube Video:  5 Reasons Why Ecommerce is Growing at Breakneck Pace 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_pjlkDJ14s0

showrooming 
mobile and tablet shopping
comparison shopping 
growing need for specialised products 
increased holiday shopping 