DEMAND, SUPPLY AND PRICE 
Applying Our Learning


FACTORS THAT AFFECT DEMAND

For each of the following statements state the effect that the scenario will have on demand:

 The company you work for has to lay you off so you are unemployed.  You have savings to help you and your family for approximately 6 months.  How will this affect the amount of essential and luxury goods that you purchase?

purchase more essentials, demand goes up
purchase less luxury goods, demand goes down

A new type of chocolate is introduced to the market that is calorie free and considered healthy.  A company has fashioned this into a plain milk chocolate bar.  How will this affect the demand for regular chocolate bars in general?  How will this affect demand of specific, flavoured chocolate bars like Caramilk, Mars, and Crunchie?

lower demand for other chocolate bars
this company might start making flavoured chocolate bars as well, lowering the demand for other brands
Some people have preferences so they might not be affected by this new bar.

Economists predict that a recession is coming and you are concerned how it will impact your career.   How would this affect your demand for products today?

change spending on products nowl don’t spend on useless things - demand for luxury goods decreases, demand for essentials might increase; demand for all good might decrease in general. 

stock up on goods now 

Toronto is a city that growing at a very fast rate due to immigration and other factors.  What impact does that have on local demand?  Why?


increase local demand because of increase in number of people who can buy the product












CONDITIONS THAT AFFECT SUPPLY?

Nokia and HTC decide to enter the tablet market and both create a product that can rival any current iPad.  How will this affect the prices of iPads?  Explain the reasoning for your response.



The Ford Motor company is contemplating their future direction.  Specifically, they are concerned with the increase in gas prices and how it is impacting their sales of big trucks and gas-guzzling SUV’s.  How might you, as a high level employee, advise the company to deal with this situation.  What options do you have?






 Explain why the price of video game consoles is decreasing over time.  Why is that?  Think of real life examples.







 You are the president of Coca Cola and the price of sugar goes down drastically.  How does this affect your supply of Coke to the market?  Or does it?  Why?