THE COMPETITION FOR MARKETS

THERE IS A LIMIT TO:
The total number of consumers
The number of consumers who use a particular type of product
The number of consumers who use a specific brand of that product
For example:
all the living in Canada 
The number of males in Canada 
The number of soda pop drinkers in Canada



THE COMPETITIVE MARKET
Consists of specific types of products as well as the businesses that manufacture these products.
The size of a market is defined by:
the size of a market is the defined by the amount of money consumers spend on these products
Manufacturers compete with each other to get a portion of the market

MARKET SHARE
The percentage that one business product takes of the total dollars spent by consumers on similar products.

MARKET SEGMENT
A part of the overall market that has similar characteristics

DISCUSS AND RECORD
How many segments are there in the automobile industry? 



INCREASING MARKET SHARE
A company can increase market share in two ways: 
1.Increase the size of the overall market
attract new customers
sell more to existing customers
get old customer back 
2. Take sales away from competitors
innovation and diversification
improving customer service 
purchasing competitors 

THE CONSUMER MARKET
Companies compete by studying the types of consumers who buy their products
The two main ways that consumers are identified and/or divided into market segments are:
demographics 
lifestyle 

DEMOGRAPHICS
Is the study of obvious characteristics that categorize human beings.
Used to target specific customers
1.  AGE
Age defines our our tastes, needs and wants
Seniors buy tickets to the symphony
Teens want video games
Children want toys



Some age groups are consumers but not often customers
Gatekeeper 
A person who makes buying decisions for others 
Companies target young people, but ultimately sell to adults 
Must have appeal to both groups
Baby-Boomers
After World War II soldiers returned home and there was a dramatic but temporary growth in population
As this group ages they have stimulated and influenced the consumer market as they have tremendous purchasing power

2.  GENDER
Businesses  create goods and services that are specific to each gender
Gender Roles
Have changed a great deal 
Purchase decisions of a decisions of a couple are now more likely to be shared 
Products are now advertised and sold to both genders
cars
food products 
cleaning products 

3.  FAMILY LIFE CYCLE
Your stage in the family life cycle often determines your wants and needs
Think about how different the wants and needs for each group are








DISCUSS AND RECORD
For each stage of the family life cycle, identify a need that would appeal to consumers.
single - 
young married -
young family -
family college kids -
empty nesters -
retired -

4.  INCOME LEVEL
Consumers are often grouped by how much money they have or earn
Some products are targeted to all income brackets 
DISCUSS AND RECORD
Name three types of products that appeal to all income groups.
 chips ahoy 
 kirkland clothes 
 reebok stuff 

Some products are marketed only to wealthy consumers
Name three types of products that appeal to wealthy consumers
 chole 
 rolex 
 gucci 

Most manufacturers and retailers make and sell products to consumers with an 
average income 


5.  ETHNICITY AND CULTURE
Canada has a very diverse population
Many cities have ethnic communities with stores that import goods to meet the needs and wants of a particular culture
Companies also create goods and services to meet the needs of specific ethnic groups
Many of these products get adopted into into mainstream culture 








LIFESTYLE
The way people live, which includes their values, beliefs, and motivations 
The study of lifestyles is called psychographics 
Based on lifestyle consumers can be categorized as either:
1.  INTROVERTED
These consumers are interested in their own self concept 
Enjoy challenge 
Develop a unique identities 
Interested in personal statements in fashion 
Have personal causes  

Businesses competing for the introverts attention will stress personal growth and experience as a feature of the products and services they sell
Eg. Take a hot air balloon ride to see the sunset from a different angle
Eg. Buy a new coat to use for winter camping 

2.  EXTROVERTED
Are very interested in the in the opinions of others 
Interested in what is trendy and fashionable 
Work hard to achieve, and buy goods & services to to reward that achievement 

Businesses competing for the extroverts attention will emphasize the popularity of a product 
Eg. Take a hot air balloon ride to have something to talk about
Eg. Buy a new coat because it is the latest fashion


ARE YOU AN INTROVERT OR AN EXTROVERT?
Why does it matter where you fall on the introvert-extrovert spectrum? Because introversion and extroversion lie at the heart of human nature - one scientist refers to them as "the north and south of temperament." And when you make life choices that are congruent with your temperament, you unleash vast stores of energy.
Conversely, when you spend too much time battling your own nature, the opposite happens - you deplete yourself. I've met too many people living lives that didn't suit them - introverts with frenetic social schedules, extroverts with jobs that required them to sit in front of their computers for hours at a stretch. We all have to do things that don't come naturally - some of the time. But it shouldn't be all the time. It shouldn't even be most of the time.
This is particularly important for introverts, who have often spent so much of their lives conforming to extroverted norms that by the time they choose a career, or a calling, it feels perfectly normal to ignore their own preferences. You may be uncomfortable in law school or in the marketing department, but no more so than you were back in junior high or summer camp.
Take the quiz on the next page to determine whether you are an introvert or an extrovert.






Answer each question True or False, choosing the answer that applies to you more often than not.
1. I prefer one-on-one conversations to group activities.
2. I often prefer to express myself in writing.
3. I enjoy solitude.
4. I seem to care about wealth, fame, and status less than my peers.
5. I dislike small talk, but I enjoy talking in-depth about topics that matter to me.
6. People tell me that I'm a good listener.
7. I'm not a big risk-taker.
8. I enjoy work that allows me to "dive in" with few interruptions.
9. I like to celebrate birthdays on a small scale, with only one or two close friends or family members.
10. People describe me as "soft-spoken" or "mellow."
11. I prefer not to show or discuss my work with others until it's finished.
12. I dislike conflict.
13. I do my best work on my own.
14. I tend to think before I speak.
15. I feel drained after being out and about, even if I've enjoyed myself.
16. I often let calls go through to voice-mail.
17. If I had to choose, I'd prefer a weekend with absolutely nothing to do to one with too many things scheduled.
18. I don't enjoy multi-tasking.
19. I can concentrate easily.
20. In classroom situations, I prefer lectures to seminars.
The more often you answered True, the more introverted you probably are. Lots of Falses suggests you're an extrovert. If you had a roughly equal number of Trues and Falses, then you may be an "ambivert" - yes, there really is such a word.
