Stanbiers actively ignores active gang violence

16 year old Andy bleed to death from a gang violence between the Royals and the Guardians, while 5 stanbiers ignored this gruesome scene, which led Andy's untimely death 

CBC news

Published Aug 27 2022 


A group photo of the royals (including Andy in the top right) only weeks before the incident. (credit: archive.kpcc.org/blogs/newmedia/2013/01/10/11934/photos-the-real-life-gangster-squad-and-mobster-mi/)





The cold winter night in New York City was shattered by a tragedy that no one could have predicted. On a street corner in the Bronx, sixteen-year-old Andy was found lying on the sidewalk, bleeding from a knife wound. Witnesses reported seeing a group of young men, believed to be members of the gang known as the Royals, arguing with Andy before one of them pulled out a knife and stabbed him. The group then fled the scene, leaving Andy to bleed out on the sidewalk. Shocking evidence from the security cameras found that Andy was left dying for more than 30 minutes, while five people undoubtedly ignored him and simply walked passed. 

Some of the onlookers noticed this unfortunate event and even tried to help. However upon seeing the bright purple jacket, people immediately turned away. One of the witnesses Angela was with her boyfriend Freddy when they witnessed the dying boy. Though very apologetic, she stated that she could not risk menduling her loved ones with the affairs of the Royals and the Guardians. “By saving one poor soul, I may have threatened the many lives of whom I care for dearly” said Freddy. 

This heartbreaking incident has left the community in shock and mourning the loss of a young life that was taken too soon. It is a stark reminder of the dangers of gang violence and the need for more effective measures to prevent it. The police are asking anyone with information about the incident to come forward and are urging members of the community to speak out against gang violence and to work together to create a safer environment for everyone. 

It is time for us to take a stand against gang violence and to ensure that no other family has to suffer the same tragedy as Andy's. We must come together to create a safer and more peaceful world for our children and future generations. More on this story as it develops. 