Kant's Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Blueprint for a Better Future

Its importance to the present cannot be overstated, as philosophers have discussed the idea of perpetual peace for eons. The concept of perpetual peace initially appeared in the 18th century in a classic book by the philosopher Immanuel Kant entitled "Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch." In this essay, Kant claimed that in order for there to be true peace, nations must give up their hostile instincts and unite into a federation built on respect and cooperation. Although the causes of World War I were varied and complicated, many historians cite the armaments race, the intricate network of alliances, and the growth of nationalism as major contributors. The principles outlined in “Perpetual Peace” could have prevented World War I and many future conflicts if just a few of the ideals had been accepted earlier, including abolishing standing armies; not crippling countries with national debt; and preventing nations from interfering with the conflicts of other nations.
Enlisting permanent military bodies creates an environment of hostilities, as the presence of such institutions acts as a catalyst for their eventual utilization. By relinquishing the notion of standing armies as indispensable, states could have prevented the escalation that led to the major conflicts of World War I. For contrast, in the years preceding the First World War, the major European nations engaged in a competition for military superiority, with each nation building up sizable standing armies in anticipation of any prospective confrontation. Due to the creation of such armed organizations, every diplomatic crisis now poses the threat of quickly turning into a full-scale conflict. The great nations' military practices, which had solidified the notion of standing armies as the cornerstone of national defense, were a primary cause of the quick escalation of hostilities in the summer of 1914. Conflict would have been averted if there had been a reduction of permanent armies, promoting a more conciliatory world order where disagreements could have been settled by diplomacy and negotiation.
Instabilities in politics and the economy can result from severe national debt between nations. When nations owe money to one another, they enter into a complicated web of responsibilities that can easily get out of hand, as seen when the consequences of such actions were amply displayed in the years following World War I. Germany was hit hard with financial penalties and massive war reparations under the 1919 Treaty of Versailles, which further undermined its already fragile economy. The ensuing economic collapse and hyperinflation created the ideal conditions for the emergence of extreme political ideologies that offered their people redemption, salvation, and a chance to gain back what they had lost, in turn sparking the fuse for the Second World War. The underlying political and economic forces that led to the destruction of the two world wars may have been mitigated if worldwide state debts had not gotten out of hand. The convoluted webs of national debt may have been averted if the escalation of underlying political and economic problems had been controlled.
Nations also won't be able to wage aggressive wars or join alliances that can cause conflict once they are subject to an international legal system. A complicated network of alliances had developed among European countries in the years before World War I, with many of them promising to support one another in the event of a conflict. When Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria-Hungary was killed in 1914, a series of occasions resulted in war; these alliances brought additional countries into the battle, which ultimately led to a terrible world war. Similarly, in the years preceding World War Two, numerous countries once again joined forces and got involved in disputes outside of their own boundaries, ultimately fueling yet another international conflict. Kant emphasizes the significance of upholding other countries' sovereignty. Nations must stay out of conflicts that do not directly threaten their own interests by concentrating on their own security and staying away from tying themselves into complex alliances. 
By just applying these few examples from “Perpetual Peace,” it would have prevented many scenarios that led to World War I, as well as many future conflicts. 























 
KNOWLEDGE         					1	2	3	4	5
THINKING             					1	2	3	4	5
COMMUNICATION					1	2	3	4	5
APPLICATION						1	2	3	4	5