Heroic Combat: The "Worm's Eye" Perspective 
12 Oct 1915 
At this stage it may be well to mention what the ordinary infantryman in the firing line has to go through and what his nerves have to stand. Old No Man's Land had an average width of 150 to 250 yds.; in many parts of the line it would come as close as 35 to 75 yds. As a rule, the narrower No Man's Land, the weak- er the wire. The distance between is so little that fixing up wire is impossible. Ready made wiring obstacles have to be thrown over and, of course, they cannot be expected to be very effective. In fact, later on, Fritz had the audacity to fix on one of our wiring obstacles and pulled it on to his own side. Anyway, besides being liable to be shelled at any moment, the man in the firing line is liable to have bombs, grenades and trench mortar [bombs] thrown at him. Machine-guns may open up and rip the sand bags at pleasure. Clamped rifles go off every now and then, trained at likely spots the infantryman has to pass. Any moment a swarm of Huns may rush him. He is liable to be blown up by a mine tunnelled underneath [the trench]. On dark nights the enemy could crawl into his trench without being seen. It is the same when it is foggy. He exists under these condi- tions, wet or dry, often in mud and slush over the knees and almost frozen with the cold. Sometimes he sleeps on the firing step or in the bottom of the trench with practically no covering or protection. When he gets wet, his clothes have to dry on him—at times he is worked off his feet digging, draining, making dug- outs, carrying timber, corrugated iron, etc. and has to run the gauntlet of being sniped on many occasions. Knowing that any moment he may be hurled into oblivion, his nerves are keyed to a certain pitch and his existence is one of sus- pense. No wonder the average man's stay in the trenches is a few months. Unfortunately these men who brave such dangers daily, hourly, have nothing to show for it. A Canadian in England gets service stripes the same as he does, not so the British Tommy. A Brigade runner, who once in a while reaches the line, stands a better chance of a decoration. Hangers-on who are seldom within the fighting area and who sleep comfortably and soundly at night and can do their own cooking, get all the medals or clasps they are entitled to. It is high time some distinction was made between the actual fighting man and his numerous knock- ers in khaki who take practically no risk at all. 
January 20, 1916 
I have noticed in orders that two of the 27th Battalion and two of the 29th Battalion have received the D.C.M.1 Sometime ago a 28th man received the same honour. He helped to dig out several of the men who were buried when Heiny exploded the mine beneath the 28th in the "Glory Hole." The military medal had not come into being yet. There are many anomalies in this war. The public still conceive the old fashioned idea that, because a soldier receives commissioned rank when in the field, he has done exceptional work and the advancement is an award for his gallantry. This is a fallacy that needs exposing. The facts are: the ambitious soldier merely puts in his application, which being earmarked by his colonel or someone of like authority, receives in due course, in nineteen times out of twenty, official sanction. In ninety per cent of decorations a similar anomaly exists. It has been often remarked that officers spend a considerable time recom- mending each other for honours. There is no question of doubt but D.S.O.s and M.C.s2 have been sprinkled around like water, the vast majority of recipients doing absolutely nothing out of the common to earn these awards... 
This indiscriminate trafficking in decorations is a crying disgrace. It is a pity these honours were not retained solely for men who have done deeds of bravery. Amongst the crowd it is difficult to pick out the real man. One has to enquire through his fellow men in his unit to ascertain if he earned the honour or not. Any eulogy from them can be taken as a sure sign that he deserved the award and full credit should be accorded him. Decorations have become so much of a joke that the recipient, conscious that he has done nothing, often remarks when questioned by his "pals" what did he do: "Oh, I guess I was first at the rations!" as if to sig- nify that the Quartermaster dealt them out. Failing which he may answer quizzi- cally, after pondering the matter over, "Blest if I know.” There have been many jests made over the "Iron Cross" owing to their lavish distribution, but our Military Cross and Military Medal could stand as much banter. Comment is unnecessary when in 1916 the Prince of Wales had the Military Cross conferred upon him. 
[Reginald H. Roy, ed., The Journal of Private Fraser, 1914-1918: Canadian Expeditionary Force (Victoria: Sono Nis Press, 1985), pp. 43-44, 84-85] Reprinted by permission of C.E.F. Books. 