
ENG3U EXAM STUDY SHEET 

Exam Format: +Matching, +T/A MCQ
Sight Passage: Read + analyzation on the spot
Media: Know the five key questions and 5 key concept + 5 key questions (analyzation on the spot)
LitCrit: Lenses (Compare & Contrast)
Poetry: Difference types of poetry, ++spoken word, poem as a mirror vs mic 

Writing: Identity explicit vs implicit thesis → what’s the best thesis



Critical Hope, Rhetorical precis, (EQ), meaning, and MWOWs 
Critical hope - In a nutshell, critical hope is a concept that emphasizes the importance of genuine, transformative hope in the context of systemic racism and inequalities. The article breaks it down into 3 types of hope (material, Socratic, and audacious). It is a hope that is relevant and gives tangible, practical help (material hope). It is a hope that examines and questions systemic inequalities while helping to highlight the inherent strengths of people in inequitable systems to encourage them to find solutions (Socratic hope). It is a hope that challenges the idea of "other peoples' problems" and calls for everyone to work together for change (audacious hope).

Systemic racism - “Institutional racism, also known as systemic racism, is defined as policies and practices that exist throughout a whole society or organization that result in and support a continued unfair advantage to some people and unfair or harmful treatment of others based on race or ethnic group.” Examples can include legal policies, widespread stereotyping, legal policies, differing treatment due to race, systemic inequalities, and systemic discrimination. 

Seven Fallen Feathers, 
The book is a great example of how Indigenous people as a group have been historically discriminated against and continue to face struggles today in modern society. 
The book is also an example of a text contributing to critical hope. The book suggests that resources should be given to Indigenous people in the country of Canada when Canada has been giving money to other countries facing trouble and when Indigenous peoples have been struggling from mistreatment and stereotypes. 
This is an example of trying to bring material hope towards the situation. This text also provides socratic hope in the view that it highlights the strengths of Indigenous people and families by surviving the trauma of residential schools and that it questions authorities on how they treat Indigenous peoples unequally. It provides audacious hope by calling for inquests on deaths and the search team to help with this dire situation on the Indigenous peoples facing mental health and stereotype struggles. It also motivates the reader to help using statistics and stories from Indigenous families that have youth in Thunder Bay.

Musical Hamilton
we get to see a unique, diversified multi-racial cast that portrays American history through the voices of ethnic minorities, which gives a voice to these minorities and demonstrates how racial equality is encouraged in the present-day culture of the United States of America, a stark contradiction to the era that creates the story of the musical, which is Revolutionary-era America, filled with racial injustice as well as slavery and subjugation. 
In Hamilton, it encourages people through the story of Founding Father Alexander Hamilton, that even when the world, and society, tells you to give up, to continue to persevere even in the toughest of situations. Through Hamilton, Lin Manuel Miranda promotes the concept of critical hope through introducing a diverse cast of characters to demonstrate the voice of minorities in 21st-century America.

The play (spoken poetry set) Subway Stations of the Cross, 
Ins Choi calls people, especially Christians to reexamine their perspectives on homelessness (the home of Jesus)
The play was inspired by his encounter with a homeless man. Through spoken word poetry, music, and song, Ins Choi callsminemin the audience to repent, follow the call of Jesus, and turn away from the allure of the world to follow the path that Jesus laid out for humanity. 
Ins Choi said that “Jesus was a man who was essentially homeless in his ministry.” He then stated that now it is the homeless who are calling us living our comfortable, privileged lives, to go towards salvation and repentance. 
The play gives dignity and a voice to the homeless, which we often disregard and ignore. Through this play, Ins Choi calls people to demonstrate Christian love, faith, and hope not only for the people we are familiar with, but for all, including those we overlook. 

Key Vocabulary

Marginalization - Treatment of a person, group, or ideas as insignificant or peripheral. 
Excluding groups of people of certain ethnicities, ideas, or even singular people as “worthless”, “irrelevant” or “unimportant” within society
Examples can include marginalization of First Nations people during the era of colonialism, Residential schools, and reserve communities, exclusion of certain racial groups

Intersectionality - The interconnected nature of different social categories: race, class, and gender. Intersectionality can help us understand positionality (my “location” within context). It can also help us see the overlapping & interdependent systems of disadvantage or advantage. Includes: Race, ethnicity, gender identity, class, language, religion, ability, sexuality, mental health, age, education, body size. Intersectionality is a lens through which you can see where power comes and collides, where it locks and intersects. It is the acknowledgement that everyone has their own unique experiences of discrimination and privilege. 

Colonization - The action or process of setting among and taking control over an indigenous population of an area, or claiming rule over an area already inhabited by people. Examples can include European Colonization of North America during the 15th-19th centuries

Bias - prejudice in favor of or against one thing, person, or group compared with another, usually in a way considered to be unfair. Many government-run news organizations such as CNN or BBC contain biases in their stories or articles. 



Book Study: Seven Fallen Feathers
7 principles of Anishinaabe
Love (Zah-gi-di-win) - know peace
Respect (Ma-na-ji-win) - to honour all creation
Bravery (Aka-de-he-win)- to face live with courage
Honesty (Gwe-ya-kwaad-zi-win) - walk through life with integrity
Humility (Dbaa-dem-diz-win) - to accept yourself as part of creation
Wisdom (Nbwaa-ka-win) - cherish knowledge
Truth (De-bwe-win) - know all these principles

Summary: Seven Fallen Feathers talks about the seven deaths of Indigenous students who left their reserves to attend school in Thunder Bay, Ontario. The author wanted to tell us that the unresolved struggles of Indigenous communities in Canada, including intergenerational trauma and a severe lack of resources, are a result of colonialism, systemic racism, and a lack of government support, leading to seven indigenous students’ deaths and the consequences their family members faced trying to bring in justice.Talaga also talks about actions taken to stop future conflict and keep the indigenous community from further suffering.

MWOW: The message of Seven Fallen Feathers is to bring awareness of the sufferings of Indigenous people from the past and even now. Unresolved struggles of Indigenous communities in Canada, including intergenerational trauma and lack of resources, is a result of colonialism, systemic racism, and lack of governmental support. None of the deaths have solid evidence of a direct cause, except for Robyn (alcohol). Tagala is including these deaths to bring awareness that the causes of these deaths is because of intergenerational trauma from residential schools, lack of funding from the government). The book is repetitive in: police unprofessionalism (Reggie, Jethro, Jordan) , poor education/living conditions (Mish, Pik), mysterious deaths (seven fallen feathers). 

She does this effectively in the sense of pathos, not logos. Her bias is strong, where sometimes she seems to overlook the truth (Reggie can swim well, but he was drunk), to force evidence to align with her view. But she does mention NNEC David’s Fox seeming mistake.

Death Summary:

Kam               Mclntyre       in home        in home        Mclntyre     Mclntyre        Kam

Chanie: loved playing marbles and was close with his sisters. Tried to run away from Cecilia Jeffrey


The Seven Fallen Feathers: → TB=Thunder bay
Jordan Wabasse (vulnerability, police negligence, prejudice, and apathy in Thunder bay)
-Young indigenous boy who loved and wanted to play hockey. He begged to be sent to TB to pursue his dream. He lived with his cousin Clifford Wabasse in TB.
-15 years old; missing since Feb. 7, 2011; didn’t show up for dinner before hockey (usually punctual); Feb. 8 reported he was missing (24+ hours later); ground search did not begin until 48+ hours later. No Amber alert & no K9 units sent. Indigenous communities banded together, and 92 days later, they found the body near the area that the Blind Elder indicated (Western Grain Terminal, in the area of the swing bridge). It seems to have been murdered by mistake (gang looking for Jordan Waboose), and another possibility is that two white men (Austin (Bubbles) and Steven) pushed him off a bridge, said Josse, a resident. Police ruled it as accidental cold water drowning.

Jethro Anderson (home sickness, lack of supervision, and boredom led him and other friends to start partying and drinking.
-A 15 year old grade 9 boy from Kasabonika Lake First Nation attending DFC
-Father and mother had marital problems so he lived with Dora and his cousins up in Big Trout
-Went missing on October 28, 2000, after attending a small drinking party. 
-Was later found in the Kam river with a gash in his head and cigarette burns

Curran Strang ( Mental health - suicide, lack of support and resources to address these issue)
Social likes to talk to girls, joke around and stand out in the crowd with his wide smile.
A teenager from Pikangikum attended DFC in 2005. Befriended James Benson, who helped him adjust to city life. But it did not help. Curran went on a downward spiral, always skipping curfew (boarding parent said) and drinking, and was depressed and lonely. Eventually, his body was found in the McIntyre River. Listed his death as accidental; the cause of death was drowning. No evidence was given that he ended up in the river by himself. After his death, Pik went into an epidemic of youth suicide

Paul Panacheese (sudden die, question well-being and safety)
His mom did not want him to go because of what she experienced in residential schools after suffering abuse.
A student at DFC, and on November 10th, 2006, he went out to see some friends. When he came home, Maryanne was asleep. He went to make a midnight snack but collapsed. His mother couldn’t find a pulse. Paul was dead. On November 11th, the coroner performed an autopsy but threw out all the evidence that would tell the Panacheese family as to why Paul suddenly died.

Robyn Harper (Lack of knowledge of alcohol; lack of understanding of using money; systemic racism)
Did not drink before moving to DFC. 
A student at DFC who died after drinking heavily (60-ounce Vodka, Smirnoff ice coolers, and six 40-ounce bottles of beers) bought by the runner (they were not old enough) with new friends to try and fit in.
Robyn’s friends helped her home but left her in the hallway. Her cousin, Brian thought she was still alive after lightly nudging her, but the next morning, she was found dead due to acute alcohol poisoning and choking on her own vomit.

Reggie Bushie (exposed police mishandling and sparked calls for justice, leading to an inquest with issues around jury representation)
An Indigenous boy who went missing after a night of drinking with his brother and some friends, and body was found in the McIntyre River

Kyle Peter Morriseau (racial discrimination, colonialism, and cultural genocide) 
Grandson of Norval Morriseau (a famous artist), one of the Fallen Feathers. Attende DFC, occurrence reports on him began to grow, and on the night of October 26th, 2009, he disappeared, and would be found by the river around 10-11 days later
Faced challenges, including arrests and erratic behavior
His body was found later with signs of alcohol influence, drowning, and questionable circumstances. 

Inquest 
Falconer wrote to include all 7 fallen feathers in the inquest. The jury made 145 recommendations. Some things have been done, such as daily patrol of police by the river NAN’s summer youth programs. But simple things like deciding whether to install cameras are still ongoing. 

Education needs to be done. This means having support, following up with students, ensuring each individual student has the care they need to exit a cycle of substance abuse and poverty. 


Other Important Characters;

Chanie Wenjack (Not a fallen feather, but still a kid who died hungry and due to hypothermia along a railroad track because he was fleeing a residential school) (In chapter 2 which talked about traumatic experiences, mistreatment of indigenous people in Canada, and assimilation of children through residential school.)
Norma Kejick (Principal/director of NNEC, attended the SFF inquest, his son Jonathan was having suicidal thoughts at DFC school)
Tanya Talaga (Author of book, Metis/Polish) → mom Metis, dad Polish
The Blind Elder (Told of visions of Jordan Wabasse)
Alvin Fiddler (NAN 2nd grand chief, called for SFF inquest) 
Maryanne Panacheese (Paul’s mother, has a grandson Rule attending Pelican fall, has two sisters, Lawrencia and Sarah, and later, a younger brother, Clinton)
Skye Kakegamic (Robyn’s friend in TB)
Ricki Strang (Reggie’s brother; he had been placed on suicidal leave at his boarding house after his brother Reggie died)
Christian Morriseau (Kyle’s father, who is the printer who created the seven fallen feather’s artwork)
Julian Falconer (Lawyer for Fiddler, NAN, more
Tammy Keeash (17 year old artist, HS student, found dead in TB waters)
Josiah Begg (14 year old boy visiting TB, found dead in a TB river)
Thunder Bay Police (Not a character, but repeatedly brushes off investigation requests.)

Organizations:
Nishnawbe Aski Nation (NAN): A political organization representing 49 First Nations communities covering two-thirds of Ontario, Canada.

Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC): A government-led initiative to address the legacy of residential schools and promote healing.

Northern Nishnawbe Education Council (NNEC): Established in 1978 for Indigenous to exercise self-governance over schooling for their children 

Indigenous & Northern Affairs (INAC): Government department responsible for Indigenous affairs. Strictly regulated DFC

First Nations Caring Society: advocates for the rights and well-being of Indigenous children and families

Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP): Federal law enforcement agency in Canada.
Called for by Indigenous leaders for an investigation in Thunder Bay.

Murdered & Missing Indigenous women and girls (MMWIG)

Seven fires
1-3: life before Europeans. 
4: predicts the coming of light skin and what would happen. 
5: war and suffering (promise of salvation from someone, but if they listened, they would be lost for generations). 
6: light skin would wear a mask of death; people deceived; the past forgotten. 
7: the young would rise up and seek help from their elders. 



Poetry

Narrative: tells a story, epics are long form.**not fully copied from slide
Lyric: (broad category) feeling and emotion. **not fully copied from slide
Dramatic: written in verse (broad term for stanzas, devices, etc…) meant to be acted/recited. **not fully copied from slide
Soliloquy: Self talk, expression of inner thought ignored audience
Monologue: One person talking usually long speech; the audience is acknowledged

Purpose of poetry
Express feelings, attract audiences
Present in a way of realistic and compassion, not exaggerated
To be easily understood compared to stories
To be easily remembered through the rhymes

What does Poetry as a mirror mean?
A: reflect reality, not dramatic things that people don’t believe

What does Poetry as a mic mean?
A: no need for any confusing language, it’s like a mic where you express yourself and your feelings to everyone (audiences).

What does Poetry as a action mean?
Catalyst for Change: Poetry can inspire action by raising awareness and motivating people to engage in social, political, or personal change.

What does Poetry as a resistance mean?
Empowerment: Through resistance poetry, individuals and communities find strength and solidarity. It empowers them to stand against adversities and fight for their rights and beliefs.

“Arrhythmia” by Natalie Lim (poetry as mirror)
- MWOW: Appreciate and understand your culture, because it can serve as a memory for  you and helps to appreciate what your ancestors who worked hard to provide for your family. Recognizing the suffering of previous generations that allowed her to live the life she has now. 
- Poetic Devices: Metaphor, Allusion, Juxtaposition
- Themes: Assimilation, Preservation of Culture, Love from parents and ancestors

“Universal Soldier” by Buffy Sainte Marie
- MWOW: Individual (everyone shares) responsibility for war, peace/pacifism. We are the ‘universal soldiers’ that keep war going.
- Poetic Devices: Rhyme, Imagery, Repetition, Juxtaposition, Contradictions/Paradox, Allusion
- Themes: Individual Responsibility, Diversity, Learning from the past, Peace/pacifism


“Where There’s a Wall” by Joy Kogawa
- MWOW: 2 roads: war (violence), peaceful+divine help 
- Poetic Devices: Metaphor, Diction, Allusion, Personification, Imagery
- Themes: Perseverance, freedom

“Still I Rise” by Maya Angelou
- MWOW: Perseverance and critical hope, Maya Angelou’s experience as a black woman in America, encouraging readers to love themselves and persevere despite hardship 
- Poetic Devices: Repetition, simile, imagery, metaphor, rhyme, allusion, diction, enjambment, parallelism, consonance, assonance, 
- Themes: Advocacy, anti-racism, gender roles, feminism, BLM/civil rights

“Song on the Subway” from Burnings (2010) by Ocean Vuong
 - MWOW: The author utilizes the train to represent the fast, ever changing, never stopping continuum we call life. We should slow down and enjoy and immerse ourselves in the little things of life, ode to music. 
- Poetic Devices: Caesura
- Themes: Beauty of Music, How music can bring peace and comfort in a life filled with conflict and unease
Text Analysis Strategies

SWIFT (simple summary and tone)
Structure: How is the poem organized? Rhyme? Stanzas? Lines? Sound devices? 
Word Choice: What diction does the poet use to elicit emotion? To what effect?: 
Imagery: What images does the poet paint with words?
Figurative Language: How does the figurative language affect/enhance the poem? Which devices are used and to what effect?
Tone: What is the poet’s central message? What is the poet’s attitude?

TP-CASTT (deep dive)
Title: Consider the title, make a prediction on what the poem is about
Paraphrase: Translate the poem verbatim into your own words on a literal level. Look for complete thoughts and look up unfamiliar words.
Connotation: Examine the poem for meaning beyond the literal. Look for figurative language, imagery, and sound elements.
Attitude/Tone: Note the speaker’s tone/attitude. Humor? Sarcasm? Awe?
Shifts: Note any shifts or changes in speaker or attitude. Look for keywords, time change, punctuation.
Title: Examine the title again, but this time to interpret the meaning.
Theme: Briefly state what the poem is about in your own words (subject), then what the poet is saying about the subject (theme). 

SOAPSTONE (research and connection)
Speaker: Who is the narrator/speaker? Why did the poet choose them to be the speaker? What details about the person are important to know?)
Occasion: What is the context: time and place? When/where do the events take place? From what context is the speaker thinking and acting from? What details are given about the setting in the text itself? 
Audience: Consider the primary, secondary, tertiary audiences of the text. Who was this written for and why? What do you know about the audience and why/how was the text written for them? 
Purpose: Why would the author write this for the audience? What is the meaning and underlying message of the text? What does the author hope to achieve? What does the author want the audience to think? How does the author make the purpose clear and realize their goals? 
Subject: What is the text’s topic? What is the author getting at? What do they reveal or hide when discussing the subject and why? 
Tone: Evaluate word choice, organization, and rhetorical patterns in the text. How do these elements affect the audience? How does the author feel about the subject? Is the message clear or subtle? How is the structure of the text related to the tone?

Play: Subway Stations of the Cross
Bread
The symbolism central to the poem is that Jesus referred to himself as the living bread in the Bible (John 6:35), and how he fulfills the spiritual thirst of mankind. Only in Him can we be sated and no longer hunger for more. There can be no better food to feast upon.

Themes: Word Origin (Stanza 45), Multiculturalism (Stanza 15) (use of different languages), Ancestry (Stanza 7) (to show God’s promise for sending a messiah), Power (Stanza 7), Salvation/ Deliverance (Stanza 5 and throughout the poem), History (Stanza 6)

MWOW: The poet uses the poem as a reminder to Jesus being the core of church and Christianity. Although the church may seem like it is built on the foundation of imperfect humans, who sin, through the commercialization and institutionalization of Jesus following, it is built on top of Jesus and how Jesus died for our sins. Since the church is built on top of Jesus dying all of humankind’s sins, the church accepts everyone no matter what language you speak.

Alternative MWOW: The poet, Ins Choi, uses different languages to show that the religion of Christianity is for people of different cultures and that the concept of Jesus being the living bread is universal across all cultures. The poet also points out the commercialization and institutionalization of the religion makes the religion seem like the foundation of the religion is imperfect humans who sin, which seems like hypocrisy. However, the poet reminds us that Jesus and his sacrifice is the foundation of Christianity. 

Devices: Metaphor (“Bread”) , Allusion (cultural, religious, and mythological elements, such as Bethlehem, Aphrodite, Venus,...), Repetition (Sanza 5 7, “From heaven to earth,...” and “Yadda yadda yadda”, Juxtaposition (stanza 7, love, war, heaven,...)

Allusions: DC, Marvel, Star Trek, Muppets, Predator, invisible net (Greek mythology), E.T.(Stanza 7), Bible (throughout the poem)

Biblical Allusions: The significance of Bethlehem (Stanza 4) in this poem specifically refers to the birthplace of Jesus. (Luke 2: 47)
Hezekiah’s Tunnel (Stanza 6) was used to block off the water from Gihon Spring to the Assyrians in the Bible and direct all the water into Jerusalem (2 Chronicles 32:24, 2 Kings 20:20). This allusion was likely used to describe Jesus’s salvation delivering people from evil. 
The bread of life (“Bread of life” in Stanza 7) is a term used by Jesus to describe how he can fulfill the spiritual thirst of mankind if people accept him. (John 6:35) It is used in this poem to highlight the importance of Jesus and his deliverance.
The genealogy of Jesus was included in Stanza 7 to show God’s plan and promise to deliver mankind (Matthew 1:1, 1 Chronicles 1) from evil.
Tone: Humorous to a dour and heavy tone that then goes into a feeling of disappointment or disapproval towards the commercialization of christianity back into passionate, humorous praise of God. 
God is Calling
MWOW: The poet uses the poem to emphasize the messages of accepting God’s call and following him, letting go from clinging on to things that control you or temporary, worldly, materialistic things, to care for those who’ve suffered loss or are in need, to take the chance to embark on a spiritual journey/a divine experience, build a close relationship, and dance with him. The poet repeats the phrase “God is calling” to emphasize what specifically God wants you to do, to follow him, to worship him, and to obey him. People mustn't blind themselves to the call of God, but rather, listen to what he wants you to do, understand, and join him. 

Summary: The poem, “God is calling” is talking about not focusing on earthly things. For example, it emphasizes that it is important to not focus on the physical and materialistic aspects of life. Instead, the poem is trying to convince the reader to focus on godly things. For example, it is trying to help a Christian to grow in biblical knowledge and profess in Christian faith. Ins Choi wants the Christian audience to build a relationship with Jesus Christ which should be treated as above the worldly things. This is evident through the fourth, fifth and sixth stanza. For example, it states in the seventh line of the fourth stanza, “Those for whom Jesus moved from the manger to the cross.”

Major Themes: Discipleship, letting go of worldly things, caring for others, building a relationship with God, listening to God’s call

Poetic Devices: Informal diction, repetition, metaphor, imagery, major Biblical Allusions (Proverbs 31:89, Colossians 3:2, Job 33:14)

Tone: The poem uses a sense of conviction, and call to action tone, persuasion and repentance for your past deeds before approaching God. 
Birkenstock Jesus 
MWOW: Birkenstock Jesus tries to get us to recenter their focus on who Jesus is, rather than all the things that affect us and our thoughts on him. It also gets us to think about what Jesus would do in the modern world. 

Summary: This poem presents an idea of Jesus Christ, and seems to try and answer the question: “If Jesus came to the present day, what would he be like? How would he dress? What would he do? How would normal average people react to him? How would Jesus fit into society? Would he enjoy things that we enjoy such as music and movies? Or most importantly, how would he react to the current Christian churches? Would he praise them as good servants, or rebuke them?

Alternative MWOW: The poem Birkenstock Jesus, found in the collection of poems written by Ins Choi known as Subway Station of the Cross, allows for a humorous depiction of a “modern day Jesus” and how Jesus would react to the modern world. This poem also gives us reflection to consider our thoughts and depictions of Jesus in our mind, and allows us to really think about who Jesus is, and what he has done beyond our own imagination. 

Major Themes: Christianity, Jesus Christ, and modern culture.

Poetic Devices: Allusions (Jesus of Montreal, Passion of the Christ, Elvis Preslxey), repetition, 

Tone: Neutral Tone, Wandering, Thoughtfulness
Repent 
MWOW: Through this poem, Ins Choi reminds the readers of the need to repent for our nature. For we are sinners by nature, sinners in the future and sinners evermore. But God forgives, he knows and understands us best, he redeemed us through Jesus, his Son. He sacrificed so much for us, gave us everything. Even when we treat Him as mere butchered meat, rejecting and forgetting his sacrifice, He continues to love and redeem us. 
We are already saved. All we need to do is to accept, acknowledge and atone for our sins. To do so, we must repent. And through that, we shall come to know God better.

Summary: Repent is a poem that speaks of repentance, for us to acknowledge our impurity, our sins and foul nature. But, in equal measure, it reminds us of the loving, eternal omnipotent being that forgives and redeemed us undeserving plebeians. Our modern world rejects, mocks and ignores His undeserved sacrifice, we treat Him as little more than rubbish, yet still, He loves us. We have done and will do many wrong things, we deserve hell for such acts, we deserve nothing, that is the harsh reality we live in. In spite of this, we can find hope in a living, forgiving, loving and eternal God that redeems us regardless of our transgressions. 

Themes: repentance, God’s love, rejectment and acknowledgement 

Poetic Devices: Parallelism, changing repetition, alliteration, alternating and internal rhyme scheme, juxtaposition

Tone: Accusatory, foreboding, harsh but gentle and also hopeful, even light hearted
Warning others of the impending doom but of also speaking of the one way to be saved. 
One need not sacrifice their whole to God, one need only seek familiarity with God.
A Baby in a Manger
MWOW: The poet, Ins Choi, in the poem “A Baby in a Manger”, explains the Birth of Jesus, how he came into the world so small and seemingly insignificant, while being God, the most powerful being in the universe. Jesus Christ seemed so small, but he would take the world by storm, and take people off of their worldly pleasures.

Summary: The events of this poem talks about a baby being born, meaning Jesus born in a manger. The poem talks about what Jesus is going to do for us and how he's taken to be forsaken, and to free us and clean our sins. Repetitive “eating”, showing that Jesus was given for us to “eat” and enjoy(wine and bread). Warning to those who are getting the wrong point “sitting on their hills”.

Themes: Jesus’s sacrifice, God’s power, Jesus -> bread
Poetic Devices: rhyme, repetition, metaphor, alliteration, imagery, allusion (Jesus’ birth)
Tone: playful tone, reverent, hopeful, reflective and a serious tone. Uses English and French. 
A Field
MWOW: Through this poem, Ins Choi reveals that treasures can be hidden in some unexpected places. Sometimes it’s better to go against public opinion in order to find that hidden treasure (Christ/heaven/eternal life). 
Summary: This poem is about a wealthy man who defies public opinion and buys a field. Everybody thought he was crazy and stupid. He began digging and ignored all their criticism, advice and warning. Surprisingly, he discovered a hidden box of treasure.

Themes: Overlooked potential, Insistence, Unexpected results, Courageous and Risk taking in life, Opportunities of rewards coming into life and presenting itself. 

Poetic Devices: imagery, metaphor, alliteration, repetition, rhyme, allusion.

Biblical allusion(parable): Matthew 13:44-46, the man joyfully gives up all the money he had in exchange for the field, which is being compared to the kingdom of heaven.

Tone: Criticism, Surprising, Doubting, Triumphant, Unbelievable
We’re Being Played
MWOW: In the poem We’re Being Played, Ins Choi describes how humanity is being “played” by modern day society’s materialistic values, being trapped in consumerism by our own senses

Summary: This poem commentates on how people are hooked on digital media and are “being played” by it, how people are hooked on it, and that everyone has been played.

Themes: Consumerism, comfortable life, removing/capturing the senses, being held captive, media having control over what we see, commercials: constant flow of information and deception, “Here we here we go” super fast rushing lifestyle, money, music that has bad influences over our decisions and lifestyle

Devices: Repetition, rhymes, imagery, allusions 

Tone: Pessimistic 

I can dance
MWOW: The poem "I Can Dance" represents the attempt to earn God's love through actions, which is impossible. The speaker describes the accomplishments they believe will earn affection, and still has not received the love they desire, as they ask how to do so. 
Summary: This poem shows that no one is perfect, and uses slang words to convey a more childish and youthful tone. This poem shows that we can be childish and silly, but we are still deserving of love.

Theme: Connection with God through prayer, relationships, earning love through actions or accomplishments (stanza 4,7) 

Devices: Imagery (childhood activities like dancing, handstands, kickflip, miming, squatting), repetition used to emphasize and highlight the things the person can do versus what they want to do 

Tone: The poet uses words and phrases that give off a sense of being imperfect or not good enough (2 out of 7, 11 seconds) The poet uses slang words and simplistic writing to convey a more casual and youthful tone and the poem also has a feeling of longing for love. Has romantic connotations. Humorous.

But they did
MWOW: The poem “But They Did” represents the isolation and longing felt between calling out and waiting for a response, whether in the context of prayer or someone coming to God.

Summary: The poem is about Ins Choi’s connections to God through prayer. That even though he is so far away from God, and that his prayers might not be practiced daily, God is always there and he always receives our prayers. In the end, he has come to terms with God and finally “meets” with him. 

Themes: Isolation (“but you were so far away”), reaching out (first 4 lines in each stanza), patience/taking time (“It took time/years), dedication, longing (“dream”), relationship (“meet”), prayer, sharing the gospel, searching for God/purpose in life

Devices: Imagery (describing how the poet touched, saw, dreamed, and met the person), repetition, figurative language

Tone: The speaker’s tone is longing for the person and hoping that they might interact with them in any way. Uses figurative language, not literal meanings. Language is more loose and vague and could mean more than literally touching, seeing, dreamind, and meeting. 
Poetry Analysis

Tone: author point of view
Mood: what audiences feel
MWOW: central message that it wants us to consider

Quagmire
Myopic
Kaleodopscp[oc 



Media Studies

Key vocabulary
Confirmation bias: to make outcome to your hypothesis
Stereotyping: thinking a characteristic of a group of people is the same
Unconscious bias: making bias without notice 
Ethics: rational judgement for our moral intuitions
Journalistic integrity: appeal of honesty in journalism
Inclusivity: to include all people, welcoming 
Normative: everything is in regular, average, normal way
Social media:  the means of interactions among people in which they create, share, and/or exchange information and ideas in virtual communities and networks.

Media Literacy is “the ability to ACCESS, ANALYZE, EVALUATE, CREATE, and ACT using all forms of communication.”

Media Analysis 5 key questions
Who created the message? Who paid for the message?
Which techniques are used to attract
How might different people interpret this message?
Which lifestyles, values, and points of view are represented or missing?
Why is this message being sent?

Rhetorical Appeals: Ethos (character), Pathos (emotion), Logos (statistics facts)

Hamilton


MWOW: Lin Manuel Miranda tells the story of Alexander Hamilton’s ambition and legacy through the lens of critical hope while highlighting the diversity to push back against historic and current vestiges of systemic racism.

How other characters view Hamilton
“Bastard, orphan, son of a whore and a Scotsman, dropped in the middle of a forgotten spot in the Caribbean by providence, impoverished, in squalor, grows up to be a hero or a scholar?”
“Ten-dollar, founding father without a father”
“Watch this obnoxious arrogant loudmouth bother”
“Hamilton never hesitates, he takes and he takes”
“Why do you assume you’re the smartest in the room”
“Why do you write like you’re running out of time”


Allusions
“Then a hurricane came and devastation reigned” - referring to the hurricane that struck St. Croix island (a small island that belongs to North America) in 1772. Wrote an anonymous note to his father. People thought the kid (Hamilton) was talented so they took a collection and sent him to mainland North America.

“Get him in front of the crowd”- usually making announcements in the plaza where people are populated. The announcer stands on a staircase or chair and makes his announcement.

“We roll like Moses, claiming’ our promised land.” - Biblical Allusion, Moses and the promised land. 
Personal thought: Moses died before entering the promised land, proving Hamilton is not afraid of death.

“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal.” - Thomas Jefferson, The Declaration of Independence

“Is he in Jersey?” - at that time many things were considered legal there. 
Personal thought: Hamilton spoke this phrase to emphasize how poor and nonsense the messenger of King Geroge was, telling him that he should go to Jersey.

“Why should a tiny island across the sea regulate the price of tea” - Boston tea party, the British tax U.S. especially heavily on tea, so they dumped it all in the sea. 


Themes
Q: Why is there a revolution?
A: because King George wasn’t a good king, he taxes high and spends them in fly happiness.

Q: At the bar where Hamilton met the three bros, why did Burr decide to leave?
A: Those four are too aggressive on the idea of revolution, and wanted to make a fast break to either increase their social status or make something big. This does not fit what Burr was thinking about therefore leaving.

Q: what did Hamilton do when they were outgunned
A: went and stole their cannons. There were 6 in total, they stole 4.

Q: What did the feather pen stand for as a symbol throughout the play?
A: Power

Q: What are some things that made connections throughout the play?
A: “Be true”, said Philips Schuyler to Hamilton → Reynolds pamphlet 
A: “I may not live to see our glory” said Laurens, who later died in war.
A: “Let me be a part of the narrative” said Eliza →

Q: What is a possible reason why Aaron Burr is so quiet and full of cautions?
A: possibly because of who he was and who his parents were. Like he said, he has a legacy to protect.

Potential questions on Hamilton
Q:  Has Hamilton demonstrated the effectiveness of the media and efficiently spread the message of the musical. In what ways, and if so, what messages is the musical Hamilton trying to spread?

Q: Why is Eliza highlighted at the end of the musical?

Q: How does the Reynolds Pamphlet correspond to our current society? Why do you think Hamilton wrote the pamphlet?

Q: How does LMM build Hamilton’s character throughout the play?

Holy Angels 
Audience - 
MWOW - To make people aware of the abuse and trauma children (like Lena Wandering Spirit) experienced in residential schools. The ‘Christian’ nuns did not seem to be echoes of God’s love, but took Indigenous culture (not allowed to speak their language, away from family, forced assimilation, and cultural genocide) from Indigenous childrem/ 
Media Literacy:
Access
Analyze
Evaluate (Relevance, Accuracy, Bias, Reliability)
Create
Act



Animation vs Live Action vs Text

Animation : Gives a clear visual representations and a clear depiction of the emotions of the characters in certain cases
Live Action: Allows actors to speak in real voices and give a real-life depiction of the actions of the characters
Text: Allows the reader to analyze and read the words, as if they were reading a book or novel or play
Short Stories
Literary Analysis Lenses
Zeitgeist: spirit of certain time

Structuralists
Linguists at heart who analyze texts by looking for common patterns, underlying themes, and semiotics (study of signs and symbols).
1920s → present
Typical Question
How should the text be classified in terms of its genre?
What patterns exist that connect the text to the larger human experience?
What can you speculate about the narrative operations and the culture from which the text emerged?

Critical race theory
1970s → present (civil rights activism background)
Understand how victims of systemic racism are affected by cultural perceptions of race and how they are able to represent themselves to counter prejudice?
Looking for structure, narratives that illustrates systemic racism
Typical Question
Where, in what ways, and to what end does race appear in dominant culture and shape ways we interact with another?
What types of text reflect dominant culture’s perceptions of race?
How can we accurately reflect the experiences of victims of racism?
How can we combat racism to ensure that all people in society experience equal representation and access to fundamental rights?

Post-modern
1966 → present
Concerned about the relativity of the truth
Opposite of structuralism
Looking for how pushing against universalist concepts can change a meaning
Universalist concepts include: objective reality, morality, and truth.
Looking in between
Subverting patterns
relativism
Typical Question
How is language thrown into freeplay or questioned in the work?
How does the work undermine or contradict generally accepted truths?
If we changed the point of view of the text, how would the story change? Whose?


Post-colonial
1990s → present
Looks at issues of power, economics, politics, religion, and culture, in how they relate to colonial hegemony
Hegemony: leadership or predominance exercised by one nation over others
In present days, it is connected to possibly fiction in creating more dramatic effects.
Typical Questions
How does the literary text, explicitly or allegorically, represent various aspects of colonial oppression?
What person or groups does the work identify as other or stranger? How are such people/groups described and treated?
How does a literary text in western canon reinforce or undermine colonialist ideology through representation and/or silence about colonized peoples?

Feminist/Gender
1960s → present (1960s, Women right activists background)
Concerned primarily with marginalization and oppression of women reinforced through literature
Feminist and gender lenses are not the same, but combined. Feminist come from gender lens
Feminism: the teaching of that all people are equal no matter race
Explores issues of sexuality, power, and breakdown of binaries.
Equality, representation, power imbalance, voice
Typical question
What are the power relationships between men and women?
What does the work reveal about operations of patriarchy(economic, political, social, psychological)?
What elements of the text can be perceived as being masculine (active, powerful) and feminine (passive, marginalized) and how characters supported these traditional roles?

Marxist
1930s to present
Socioeconomic system: our experience of the world
The material dialectic: ideas are derived from material. Material realities not ideologies that drive change.
The revolution continuing conflict → revolution
Determines experiential truth
Typical Question
Whom does it benefit?
What is the social class of the author?
What values does it reinforce?
What values does it subvery (push back against)?
How do characters from different classes interact or conflict?


“The Paper Menagerie”

Inciting incident: conflict with Mark, bullying at school
Conflict: Jack vs. mom, Jack vs Mark, Self (cultural identity), and society (racism, assimilation).
Climax (protagonist addresses conflict): Shift in Jack’s behavior, death of mother/last talk with her, right before the mom’s letter
MWOW: Ken Liu wrote this to preserve the relationship one has with their culture and to show a mother’s love, the sacrifices they make and their hidden suffering. We should not be influenced to change our cultural identity or be ashamed of it by society. 

Theme: despite the environment that is influencing, and how technology has advanced throughout time, we need to not forget the cultural connection between us and our family elders. As for the environment, some parents don’t speak English and some children don’t speak chinese. Culture is not only a language, but a connection that’s not expressed through words. 

“On the Road”

Inciting incident: When the Reverend shuts the door on Sargeant, breaking into the church. 
Conflict: Sergeant vs society (racism, prejudice, marginalization, jail, police) 
Climax (tone shift): Leading up to conversation with Christ or being arrested. From ‘weak’ to having ‘no intention of being pulled’. Before Christ, tight, darker tone dialogue. Dialogue with Christ is free flowing, friendly, and very conversational. 
MWOW: Langston Hughes wrote this to humanize homeless people and point out the hypocrisy and contrast between Christians and Christ. 

Writing
Soft or Implicit Thesis
Components:
Key Element
Text
MWOW
Meaning of the Work as a Whole 
MWOW = (Big Idea + Author Thinks or is trying to say about that idea)

E.g. In the conversations between characters in "A Real Durwan," Jhumpa Lahiri utilizes characterization, highlighting the socioeconomic relationships between the marginalized protagonist, Boori Ma, and the supporting characters. Lahiri uses this to expose and condemn human selfishness, prejudice, and greed.

Thesis Question:
How does Key Element demonstrate MWOW in text by author?
MWOW = BIG IDEA + Author's perspective/message about the idea

(Soft or Implicit) Thesis:
Key Element + Primary Text reference + MWOW

(Hard or Explicit) Thesis:
MWOW is demonstrated by Key Element 1 + Key Element 2 + Key

Element 3: Thesis Stems:

illuminates the text's concern with reveals how discloses why/how teaches the reader that expresses the human predicament of confronts the notion of highlights the human struggle of emphasizes the text's treatment of contributes to the book's proposition that develops the reader's awareness of speaks to the universal concern of dramatizes the conflict between

Rhetorical precis
THE STRUCTURE OF A RHETORICAL PRÉCIS
Sentence One: Name of author, genre, and title of work, date in parentheses; a rhetorically active verb; and a THAT
clause containing the major assertion or thesis in the text.
Sentence Two: An explanation of how the author develops and supports the thesis.
Sentence Three: A statement of the author’s apparent purpose, followed by an “in order to” phrase.
Sentence Four: A description of the intended audience and/or the relationship the author establishes with the
audience.

E.g. Sheridan Baker, in his essay "Attitudes" (1966), asserts that writers' attitudes toward their subjects, their audiences, and themselves determine to a large extent the quality of their prose. Baker supports this assertion by showing examples of how inappropriate attitudes can make writing unclear, pompous, or boring, concluding that a good writer "will be respectful toward his audience, considerate toward his readers, and somehow amiable toward human failings" (58). His purpose is to make his readers aware of the dangers of negative attitudes in order to help them become better writers. He establishes an informal relationship with his audience of college
students who are interested in learning to write "with conviction" (55).


Types of writing
Note by Ethan H: I likely suck at these, feel free to replace these if they’re bad.

Expository - Reveal info/facts (informative, factual, objective, explanation, like wiki page)
Example sentence: There was a car crash at Filler Street at 3:42, killing two people.

Descriptive - Describes story with heavy detail (sensory details, figurative language, like a book) 
Example sentence: The prisoner sat, cold and shaking with fear, as Daniel waterboarded him with soy sauce while laughing with glee.

Persuasive - Positional, persuades reader (Appeals, biased, praise/criticize, shows evidence) 
Example sentence: Because of [evidence], Guy Johnson can be proven to have not murdered GIrl Janedaughter.

Argumentative - Support a claim, make an argument (Prove point, supports claims, like article) 
Example sentence: I believe that Guy Johnson is the murder victim, because of [evidence].

Discursive - Present both sides of an argument (Neutral, aims to inform and provide opinion)
Example sentence: On one hand, the defence showed [evidence]. The prosecution, however, showed [evidence].
 
Narrative - Tell a fiction/nonfiction story (like a news article or story, can be any POV) 
Example: Daniel was found guilty of waterboarding a person now deceased from soy sauce. He made no effort to defend himself during his arrest.
Poetic Terminology

Literary/Poetic Devices

Allegory: a narrative or text with a sustained semantic reference to another narrative or text.
Allusion: indirect reference to something (text, or play, song, historical event) which the reader is supposed to be familiar.
Anecdote: a brief recounting of a relevant episode. Used in fiction and nonfiction to develop a point or for humour. 
-Diction: word choice, particularly as an element of style (eg. formal, informal, ornate, plain).
-Colloquial: ordinary or familiarity type of conversation. A colloquialism is a common or family type of saying (similar to adage and aphorism).  
-Connotation: rather than dictionary definition (denotation), it is the associations suggested by a word. Implied, rather than literal meaning. 
-Jargon: the diction used by a group which practices a similar profession or activity. 
-Vernacular: language or dialect of a particular country or clan/group or just plain everyday speech. 
Euphemism: a more agreeable or less offensive substitute for generally unpleasant words. 
Figurative language: opposite of literal language, writing that is not meant to be taken literally. 
-Analogy: comparison of one pair of variables to a parallel set of variables.
-Hyperbole: exaggeration. 
-Metonymy:  replacing an actual word or idea, with a related word or concept. eg. I could not understand his tongue (tongue = language). Synecdoche: a type of metonymy when a  whole is represented by naming one of its parts or vice versa. eg. check out my new wheels.
-Personification: giving human-like characteristics to something that is not human.
-Simile: using like or as to make a direct comparison between two very different things. 
-Synesthesia: a description involving a ‘crossing of senses’. eg. a purplish scent. 
Imagery: word or words that create a picture in the reader’s mind. 5 senses. 
Irony: When the opposite of what you expect to happen does. (verbal: say something and mean something opposite/different, dramatic: when audience knows something character doesn’t, situational: found in plot/story line)
Juxtaposition: placing things side by side for comparison. Used to make a point. 
Mood: the atmosphere created by the literature and accomplished through word choice. 
Motif: recurring idea in a piece of literature. 
Oxymoron: when apparently contradictory terms are grouped together and suggest a paradox. eg. jumbo shrimp. 
Paradox: a seemingly contradictory situation which is actually true. 
Parallelism: aka parallel structure or balanced sentences, sentence construction which places equal grammatical constructions near each other, or repeats identical grammatical patterns. Used to add emphasis, organization, and sometimes pacing.
-Anaphora: repetition of word, phrase, or clause at the beginning of two or more sentences or clauses in a row. eg. I came, I saw, I conquered. 
-Antithesis: two opposite or contrasting words, phrases, or clauses, or even ideas, with parallel structure. eg. It was the best of times. It was the worst of times. 
-Chiasmus: when the same words are used twice in succession, but 2nd time, order of words is reversed. eg. when the going gets tough, the tough get going. 
-Zeugma (Syllepsis): when a single word governs or modifies two or more other words, and the meaning of the first word must change for each of the other words it governs or modifies. eg.  The butler killed the lights, and then the mistress. 
Parody: exaggerated imitation of a serious work for humorous purposes. 
Poetic devices: a device used in poetry to manipulate the sound of words, sentences or lines. 
-Alliteration, assonance, consonance, onomatopoeia, rhyme…)
Syntax: grammatical arrangement of words. 
Understatement: the ironic minimizing of fact, understatement presents something as less significant than it is. 
-Litotes: type of understatement, generated by denying the opposite of the statement which otherwise would be used. eg. Hitting that telephone pole certainly didn’t do your car any good. 




UNit test

The robinson superior treaty paved the way for the settlement of Thunder bay. (T)
Before it was amended, the indian act forced all indigenous children under the age of 16 to live in a residential school with the goal of forced assimilation (T)
Which of the following from the seven principles of the Anishinaabe are most closely tied with creations and nature? Answer: Dbaademdizwin (humility)
What might account for the inaccuracy in the total number of MMWIG as reported by the RCMP Answer: RCMP solve rate was comprised of total arrests or intended arrests made, Not all indigenous people hold status card, runaways are not classified as MMWIG.
According to the seven fire prophecy, we are currently in the eight fire (F)
According to the summary of the final report of the truth and reconciliation commission of canada, cultural genocide includes the banning of language. (T)
What does the term “intergenerational trauma” refer to?
Answer: trauma passed down through generations
How does the book emphasize the importance of community support and solidarity?
Answer: By highlighting the role of community groups in providing resources and assistance

Essay notes
No draft notes on the final draft, at the beginning need first and last name, and a title.
When introducing a quote, for the first time, I need to introduce the title and author. If it's an article, introduce the year. Only allowed to quote in () if it's in the same paragraph. Give some summary for the book when first introduced. 