Weather: Short period of time (months) Climate: Long term (30 years) Global temperature average = thousands of stations covering earth (per month), they include (Temperature, precipitation, sunlight, wind speed) Atmosphere: Troposphere: weather happens 0-15km Stratosphere: own ozone layer Mesosphere: coldest (-90c) Thermosphere: hottest (15,000c) Gasses: Nitrogen 78%, Oxygen 21%, Argon 0.93%, Carbon Dioxide 0.038% Albedo: reflection of light, snow 7-8%, ocean 80-90% Climatograph: data for a region (30y), using temperature and precipitation Radiative Forcing: short term effects Climate Forcings: Forcings: events that cause or lead to change. Response: the final result of a forcing. Lag: how long it takes (forcing - response) Natural Climate Events: Milankovitch Cycles: extremely long term, movement of earth around the sun, affecting the amount of radiation received. Precession: wobble, has amount & intensity of solar radiation at north & south, (26,000y). Obliquity: Tilt of the axis, greater temperature difference between seasons, (41,000y). Eccentricity: change of elliptical orbit around the sun, 100,000y. Solar cycles: Sun spots: darker cooler spots of the sun, (on the photosphere), 11y, radiation changes by 0.1-0.2. Volcano: (2-3y)  Aerosole: small particles in air. Gasses: H2O, CO2, (SO2) sulfur dioxide, SO2 + H2O->Sulfate, largest impact is when ejects to the stratosphere. El Nino: Warming of sea, stop of nutrient rich cold water, decline of fish. East is hot = more floods. La Nina: East cool = more droughts less precipitation. Forest fires: produces bad gasses and smoke. 3 Regions: Tropical, temperate, polar. Koppen Climate: Based on 3 factors, average monthly temperature, average monthly precipitation, average yearly precipitation. Tropical moist: monthly average above (18c), precipitation greater than 1500mm, may have short or no dry seasons. Dry Climate: range from (40c) summer to (-40c) winter, precipitation low. Moist mid-latitude climate with mild winters: warm to hot summers, average coldest month above (-3c). Cold winters: warm to cool, below (-3c). Polar: warmest month below (-10). Ecozones: developed over long periods of time, separated by ocean, desert, or mountain. Ecoregions: subdivisions of ecozones, such as plains, lakes, mountains, rivers. Indicators: Health problems, Global warming: average temperature rose (0.8c) since 1880. Glaciers: west antarctica overall loss/year is (65km3), oceans rise 0.16mm per year. Sea levels: over 100y it has risen 10-15cm, could rise by 10-40 in next 100y. Cause: ice melting, thermal expansion. Effect: loss of large cities, large number of people will be displaced. Ocean acidity: cause: ocean absorbed ½ of all carbon, dissolved carbon = carbonic acid = more ph levels, Effect: threatens coral and organisms to build hard exoskeletons, fish reproduction. Extreme weather: scientists look for frequency, intensity, duration, timing. Can have economic loss, human casualties, ecosystem damage. Desertification: land slowly dries out, nothing can grow. Deforestation: human activity, forest fires. Agriculture. Unit 8: Open System: energy and matter can cross system boundaries. Close system: only energy can pass. Feedback Loops: when output is returned to the input, like a circuit. Positive: Output is amplified everytime the input is returned, creating exponential growth. Negative: output is reduced everytime input is returned, coming to a complete stop eventually. Three types of energy transfers: Radiation: transfer of energy, from sun to earth, fire to body. Conduction: Transfer of thermal energy between 2 adjacent objects. Convection: energized molecules move from one place to another, hot air rises, can not happen in solids. Upwelling: vertical movement of sea water, brings nutrients from the sea floor. Energy Budget: total energy exchange within a system. Greenhouse gasses (GHG): water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane, absorb and emit thermal energy, slowing the loss of heat into space. Concentration: amount of a substance within a substance. Measured using (PPM) Parts per million. 1000ppm of salt = 1000 parts salt per 1,000,000 pure water. Types of GHG: CO2: not 99% of atmosphere, has reached 400ppm, CO2 and water is the most abundant GHGs. Water vapor: Most abundant GHG, responsible for 65-85% of GH effect. Halocarbons: produced by industrial processes, absorbs more radiation than carbon, stays in atmosphere for thousands of years. Methane: produced by bacteria that break down waste material. GWP (global warming potential): ability to warm the surroundings from absorbing thermal energy. Anthropogenic Greenhouse Effect: increased capacity of the atmosphere to absorb and prevent the escape of thermal energy because of an increase in greenhouse gasses. Biogeochemical Cycle: a natural processes that exchanges matter and energy between the abiotic (non-living) & biotic. an increase in matter in one part of a system (abiotic) will result in a an equal and opposite decrease in another part of the system (biotic) Store: a part of a biogeochemical cycle in which matter or energy accumulates. Normally, cycles are in balance, meaning the amount of material flowing into a store is nearly the same as the amount of material leaving the store. Carbon stores: most carbon on land is stored in plants, animals and decaying matter. CO2 can remain in the atmosphere (50-100 years) while methane stays for only about 12 years. CO2 from the atmosphere dissolves into the top layer of the ocean, and can remain in deep waters for 500-1000 years. Carbon stored in shells of marine animals, such as corals, builds up on the seafloor becoming limestone. Coal, oil and natural gas are formed from the remains of plants and animals that are buried by sediment over time. Great ocean conveyor belt: The great ocean conveyor belt” is a continuous, twisting ocean current mixing ocean water  from the North Atlantic and the South Pacific oceans, carrying thermal energy around earth’s surface. It  takes roughly 1,000 to 1,500 years to complete a cycle. The pattern in which the water moves is called thermohaline circulation. How it affects climate change: Warming temperatures increase ice melting rate leading to an increase in fresh  water, leading to lower salinity  in northern oceans. The increase of the vaporation rate leads to an increase in salinity  in tropical  oceans. Polar water becomes less dense and tropical water becomes more dense. Polar water is less likely to sink  toward the ocean floor, which is the main driving force for the thermohaline circulation system. This affects the transfer of thermal energy between the oceans and atmosphere.Global carbon budget: When the budget is balanced, the rate of CO2 entering the atmosphere is nearly equal to the rate it leaves the atmosphere. Nitrogen cycle: 80% is nitrogen, nitrogen must be converted (called nitrogen fixation, caused by lightning strikes and bacteria on the roots of plants) into other forms in order to be used by living things. Water Pollution: Excess nitrogen from agriculture is washed away by rainwater and ends up in nearby rivers, lakes, and oceans. can result in rapid growth of algae, unsafe drinking water, and dead zones (areas where massive amounts of algae have died, are decomposing, using up oxygen in the water, 150 areas in the world). Air pollution: Ammonia can mix with other compounds in the air to create smog, Nitrous oxide is a greenhouse gas and is a result of agriculture. Nitric oxide is a result of vehicle exhaust, and nitric acid is present in acid rain. Unit 9: Paleoclimatology: the study of past climates interested in how Earth’s climate has changed throughout history (the study of ice cores, tree cores, sedimentary rock & fossils). Trees: growing in environments with distinct growing seasons produce annual growth rings. There are no fall or winter rings because trees in northern environments are not actively growing during those seasons. Rings are thicker when warm and wet. Rings are thinner when hot and dry. Spring Ring: Thicker and lighter because there is more water present and growing conditions are ideal. Summer Ring: Thinner and darker in colour because there is less water and the growing xylem cells are smaller. Dendrochronology: Method of dating based on the analysis of patterns of tree rings, also known as growth rings. Can be used to piece together past climates & used for evidence of floods, fires, insect attacks. Tree dating: Cross-dating is the process of comparing and combining the
data from cores of living & dead. 



