Pick a subject (hobby, interest, project or activity) that means a lot to you and describe the impact it has personally had on you and/or others. 
 
A hobby and interest of mine is VEX, a robotics competition. It has arguably made me into who I am today. I come from a Chinese culture, where I was taught that good grades will make your future brighter. Although this worked well in the past, I have now realized that it has killed my creativity and my motivation to gain experience in areas that interest me. I was never taught to work toward these interests. My motivational drive was killed because I had always been doing things because I had too. However, through VEX I have learned what it means to be motivated and to do things that take hard work and time. Instead of relying on my parents to make the decision, I have started to take responsibility for my own life and bear the consequence for my poor decisions. Because of VEX I have found my own path, gaining independence and maturity along the way. These are some of many reasons why VEX has a huge impact on my life.  
 
 
Tell us about a time you failed or struggled at something, or a time you overcame adversity. How did this experience help you grow as a person? *
 
        	I really struggled with math when I was in middle school and my grades were very poor. I disliked math and was not thrilled to be in class. My belief was that I am just not good at math, which in turn brought my self-esteem down a lot. What made me change was when I realized that it was affecting other parts of my life. I was forced to try my best to overcome this problem, however even after a tutor and many hours of studying, I still was unable to understand. I struggled like this for over 2 years, but it finally hit me when I asked my friend how he was able to improve at math. I realized that it was only my point of view that was affecting me. Everyone is born with the capability at succeeding at any subject, despite maybe having extra challenges. Our belief about ourselves heavily impacts our ability to succeed. I realize that I can be successful at anything if I put in the work and believe in myself. If we see math as a nuisance, then we will naturally reject math and not want to learn it. By changing my point of view, I changed my way of approaching things in my life.
 
Tell us about a time you taught yourself something new. What did you teach yourself and what was your motivation? How did you go about your learning? 
 
        	Card tricks are something that I have not regretted putting my time into learning. Although it might not be super helpful, it was a very important learning process that I use every time I learn something new. The internet is vast and full of information. Now, you can learn any skill if you are willing to put in the time and practice. By slowly accumulating my time to work on this skill, learning anything would not be hard. This all comes from my motivation to learn; I have always enjoyed learning new skills no matter how small it is. I find many subjects and ideas interesting now and working on different skills and perfecting it brings me joy. I find that failure is a learning opportunity to improve myself and I don’t accept failure as the end. And that is what drives me to learn different things, while not giving up in the process.
