4 pathways to success:
Workplace
Apprenticeship (learn special skills to work)
College (applied learning, prepares you for specific work. Chef, nurce)
University (Theoretical learning get 4 years of knowledge in the one subject)

How to get a diploma (ontario secondary school diploma)
30 credits
18 compulsory courses
12+ optional courses
40 hours of community involvement
Pass the Gr.10 literacy test
2 online Learning Credits 

Types of courses
Gr.9/10 Applied (P) ->
Gr.11/12 College Prep (C)
Gr. 9/10 academic (D) -> 
Gr. 11/12 university prep (U)

Open: (O) all students of all pathways may take
De-streamed (W): Gr.9 - 10 course
College / University Preparation (M):
Gr.11 & 12

Course selection 
March: preliminary option sheet survey (Pick the courses that you want in the school)
April/May: Final Course Option Sheet (choose your courses)
September & january: add/drop deadlines 
Full disclosure deadline(drop courses before deadline otherwise uni will see that you drop the credit)
Summer school registration
online / night school registration

Important terminology
OSSD: Ontario Secondary School Diploma
Compulsory Course: course you must take and credit that must be earned to obtain the OSSD
Optional/Elective Course: courses you can take to add to your knowledge and skills base, and explore interests
Pre-requisite Course: course you must take and pass in order to take the subsequent related course.
Remedial Course: course you take if you received a final mark between 35-49% (55 hours)
Accelerated Course: 110 hours to get ahead (Check prerequisites)
OEN: Ontario Education Number (9 digit number assigned to each student in Ontario)
Ontario student transcript (OST): official copy of a student's academic record of courses taken from Gr. 9-12

Community involvement: 
reinforce s civic responsibility 
Strengthens the community 
Provides experience for students

OSSLT: ontario secondary school literacy test
Test of Reading and Writing skills learned up to Gr. 9
Students are first eligible to write in Gr. 10
Offered in the spring, once a year in Ontario Results are Pass or Fail
After a student has attempted the test once, he or she may choose to take the Ontario Literacy Course (OLC40) to complete the requirement as

Types of financial aid
OSAP Loan (Gov gives you money based on your income)
Bursaries (financial needs)
Scholarships (given to you for achievements)
Grants (people give you money just because they can)

Plan towards the end goal because of prerequisites


Financial literacy
To manage money well, people actually need to learn...
How to think critically about financial opportunities
How to persevere & solve problems
How to save
How to understand the ethical implications of financial decisions
How to make achievable S.M.A.R.T. goals
How to collaborate with others to reach financial goals

Key vocabulary
Wages vs salary: salary is a fixed amount of money that is agreed on, wages are $/h or it can change depending per day.
Gross income: the amount of money you make before taxes
Net income: the amount of money you make after taxes
Deductions: anything that is taken out of your paycheck
EI contributions: (Employment Insurance) it is insurance for when have no job
Cpp contributions: (canadian pension plan) 
Expenses: the stuff you buy/ if you wanna live
Loan: when you borrow money from another person that must be repaid. 
Interest: a percentage of the loan that must be paid back 

taxable : 
Any money you make from a job
RESP(registered education savings plan)
RRSP (registered retirement savings plan)
Not taxable: 
Money that you get from lottery
TFSA (Tax free savings account)

Savings Accounts:
How long will I be keeping the money in my account?
How often will I want to withdraw money?
How much money do i estimate keepin in the account
TFSA? (will need to wait till 18)

Factors to consider: 
Monthly fee?
Transaction fees?
Online banking?
Reporting fees?
Interest rate?
NSF (Not sufficient funds) charges? No money
Transactions Fees?

Living does it means to live within my means
Rainy day funds?
Needs vs. wants

Income examples
wages /salary
Money from side hustle
Gifts 
scholarship , grants, and bursaries
Money from an RESP
Interest from investment 
Loans
When making payment labeled as expenses

Housing 
Rent, mortgage
Utilities
Food
Groceries, eating out meal plan
essential 
Medications toiletries, clothes
School needs
Tuition and student fees
book s, supplies, lab fees, ets
Transportation 
Transit
Car payment, insurance fees
Extras
Movie tickets, travel, ets

Money management tips
Build in some wiggle room into your budget by rounding your expenses up (to the nearest dollar, $5, $10)
﻿﻿Be self-disciplined
﻿﻿Be goal oriented
﻿﻿Don't spend everything you make
Consider setting aside money for donations, tithes, etc.
﻿﻿Keep track of your income and spending
﻿﻿Use cash, check your banking app regularly, use a budget
﻿﻿Be smart with interest:
Pay high interest loans first and low interest loans last
Earn more interest than you spend

Fixed interest: unchanging percentage
Variable interest: changing depending on canada
compound interest: A = P(1+i)

Should you apply for a job that you are 100% qualified for
Y: security, hired and not fired. Performance
N: possibility for growth (professional development). Exploration



