Appeasement was a diplomatic approach that sought to prevent conflict by yielding to the demands of a hostile state. The assumption was that making concessions to the aggressor would satisfy them and keep the peace, and it was used in the years preceding World War II. However, as we know, it failed to address Germany's aggressive actions, resulting in the outbreak of war. 

The allies were unable to recognize Nazi Germany's aggressive nature and the genuine aims of Hitler; even our own prime minister, William Lyon Mackenzie King, thought he was a nice guy. When he publicly declared territorial ambitions and violated the Treaty of Versailles by re-arming and invading the Rhineland. Instead of responding to these forceful steps, the appeasement policy permitted Hitler to continue his expansionist objectives. When the appeasement strategy was abandoned, Nazi Germany had already conquered Austria and Czechoslovakia, and the allies still weren't ready for war.

The policy was so concerned with keeping the peace with Nazi Germany that they ignored the concerns of other nations that were endangered by its aggressive acts. The Czechoslovakian government, for example, which faced invasion by Nazi Germany, was not consulted or given a say in the negotiations that led to the agreement. Like taking candy from a child, this disrespect for other countries' concerns, damaged the policy's effectiveness as well as the trust of the League of Nations.

Appeasement was a bad idea because it failed to consider alternative approaches that could have a greater impact once it became clear that appeasement had little effect when Hitler attacked Sudetenland after conquering Austria. If the League of Nations had reacted more aggressively to Nazi Germany's hostile acts earlier on, it could have discouraged Hitler as well as other potential threats from the axis powers. Furthermore, the appeasement policy overlooked the potential benefits of diplomatic engagement with other nations threatened by Nazi Germany, such as the Soviet Union. Like how an ostrich buries their head underground when in danger, the League of Nations did the same when they implemented appeasement.