Is the R. v. Butler Community Standards test good?

“The courts must determine what the community would tolerate others being exposed to on the basis of the degree of harm (eg. rape, discrimination against women) that may flow from such exposure.”

Artistic Defense: Is it the main objective or part of the wider artistic/literary theme?

If just Community Standards, the people are very vulnerable to corrupt morals. People would be more prone to subjectively evaluate the case. But having a utilitarian view of morality allows people to have an objective bottom line to make their decisions. If the test was just focused on harm prevention, then the law should have to be a lot more strict with other areas of law. For example, why isn’t there a limit to how much alcohol someone can buy? Everyone agrees that alcohol is bad for the body. Sweets aren’t good for the body either. So to prevent harm, should the government ban sugar? People may argue that having community standard will be dangerous. If the community’s moral are corrupt, then the law regarding obscenity would also be corrupt. Some would argue that people 50 years ago would have found any porn obscene. People find regular porn normal now. So, in 50 years, people will find violent porn acceptable? Yet, this is a slippery slope. Furthermore, there are undeniable morals that exist cross-culturally and across time, like sexual violence against a woman is wrong. People who disagree would belong to a small fraction of the population. 

The Community Standards test is good because it is able to indirectly reflect the morals of the society as well as objectively determine the effects of harm done. It is undeniable that morals exist. The test shows the existence of universal morals, and it allows morals to exist within the law. We live in an age where the law and morals must be separate. Determining the degree of harm (gender equality in the Charter for example) is an acceptable way to display public morals.  Apart from the fraction of amoral individuals, as a community, people would agree that rape and child sacrifice are wrong. But some would argue about Ancient civilizations that had child sacrifice? It is important to note that the law is meant for current society and not Ancient society. It is also important to note how morals have been evolving over time. For example, LGBTQ morals 50 years ago would have been very different. Porn is also increasingly common. However, there is still a bottom line of morals over time. 

