Theodore Chiu
Nov 13, 2024

Descriptive Essay Peer Review (Sophie Tam)

Old Wife

There is a large rock in the center. It has two humps like a camel. Each hump is a little jagged and rough. If a young child were to run their tender hand across the slope of the tiny mountain, the child would be amazed at the many scratches on their skin and how their skin that has peeled off like an orange peel. There are dark brown shrubs, like little stubbles of hair, that trace the bottom of the rock. Above this, there is darkness. The darkness in the middle layer of the mountain is not just a black or dark brown, but there is a magnificent shine to it. The sun reflects on the slope of the rock and makes it seem as if there are large diamonds and crystals bulging out from it. The top of the mountain is brown. It looks like dry soil. In front of the great rock, a shore sits quietly with its purple pebbles and grey particles of sand. It has a blanket made of red dirt. Lastly, a pool of water paints the most stunning canvas, a reflection of the serene setting. The light blue sky, the white clouds – a deeper blue does begin to take over, however – the magenta tint, the ginger orange stain, and most importantly, the great, big rock are all in the aqua canvas. There is a scent of minerals in the air. The taste of the air is fresh, and all that can be heard is a gentle wind tickling people’s ears. 

I like this paragraph, I think you can expand on the “taste” sense like maybe the fog and salt from the ocean as well as the “scent” sense. The description of sight and touch is done well. Some effective words are used to describe the sensation of the touch. I like the words “stubbles”. Personally, I feel like these sentences are very statemental, and are short sentences. I would try to make it more engaging, almost like your telling a story instead of just stating the facts. 

Monarch Butterfly

You must be quick or else you’ll miss it. In only a few seconds, you must see the black and orange wings, the cluster of flowers, and the pile of stones in the background. First, there are the wings. Black lines run to the edge of the wing like veins as they rush blood away from your heart to the rest of your body. The rim of the wing is framed with a darkness, but little white dots provide a glitter of hope. You must not be tricked though! It tasted horrible! However, my friend, if you do eat it, do not worry too much. The aromatic smell of the flower will rush into your nose and overwhelm all sense of disgust. Quick! Quick! Remember your eyes. The flowers are interesting. They have tubes that connect to a small set of petals. It is like when you stretch your arm out to the sun and open your little palms; your arms are the purple tubes that hold the petals; your palm is like the petals of the flower; you are like the flower, my friend! You raise your hand to look at the sun, just like those little purple petals! Some of the petals are sleeping though. Be careful not to wake them up. At the back, a slope of rocks sits quietly. The rocks are smooth to touch. Some are pink, while others are gray. Lastly, my friend, if you listen closely, you may be able to hear the fluttering sound of the king’s wings as it lifts up into the air and soars to its next destination. 
I really like the comparison you used between the human and the flower, it really highlights the the different senses and expands of the description. Add the sense of touch, maybe with the flowers and the stems and the petals. I like the engagement between the audience and the paragraph. I would describe the body of the butterfly more indepth to ephasize the main character in your paragraph. You seem to have some sort of order in your paragraph becasue you use firstly and lastly, but I think you dont use the sense of order in the middle of your paragraph and then go back to using it and it’s kind of confusing. There is also a lot more room for metaphors that can make your paragraph more creative and imaginative. I like this one the best though. 

Quebec City

At the top of the house, there is a small porch. The first two stories of the house are a deep blue – a mix of navy and cobalt and ultramarine. On the top floor, a pale yellow door stands in the middle. Two small windows stand on guard to the left and the right. The second level is much like the first, except that it is a bit larger. The bottom floor, which sits right next to the sidewalk,  has a door with a window in the middle, but the guards on the left and right are far larger. The guards carry rectangular planters that hold a variety of plants. Some of the plants want to be grounded to the earth, so they reach down to the sidewalk, while others stretch out their stems up to the sky, hoping to absorb just a little more sunlight.  There is a aroma of croissants and fresh coffee tainting in the air, as quiet chattering runs all around the city. Although there are bursts of colour, like a rainbow that splits as the sunlight hits a prism of glass, all around the city, from the red and yellow and blue houses to the grey sidewalks that line the grey cobblestone roads, although there are millions of conversations occurring all at one time – some at restaurants and others at the local park in the distance about 100 metres from the house, and although the bricks on the homes are aged and rough to touch, peeling back the young skin on your hands and making you realize you are not anymore that young, the barking dogs and shuffling of feet cannot overwhelm the sense of peace in Quebec City. 

I also really like this one, the descriptions and comparisons make the words come to life. All the senses are used really well. 


