Theodore Chiu
Nov 11, 2024
Descriptive Notes 
Old Wife
Jagged rocks
Rough to touch
Purple, blue and water with orange rocks
Orange and purple rocks
Huge stone with mountain
Quiet, sound of wind
A mineral smell
Salty
Shore-like area in the middle with purple sand and small stones that changes to a reddish-brown sand. And then gray.
The sky reflects in the water (light blue, the white clouds, to a darker blue, to a magenta, to an orange).
The mountain is reflected in the water. It is more orange in the water but more brown and purple not in the reflection.
Water → shore → mountain. 
Brown shrubs that dot the bottom of the mountain. Black, dark, colours in the middle of rock, but the sun causes the rocks to shine a little bit, especially in the middle of the mountain.
Air tastes fresh. No pollution. 

Street Meat
There are 6 hotdots. The hot dogs are bright red, and the bread is lightly toasted. The hotdogs are held with one hand, and the picture is taken from above, with all the hotdogs pointing to a central point. People hold the hotdog with one hand. A couple caucasian feet and thighs can be seen (one is wearing flipflops (with a red stripe), another is wearing running shoes). The person on the bottom left corner has denim shirts and curls their hand up towards the sky. The person on the right also has blur shorts, but they look like running shorts. They are in the city or in a parking lot, perhaps on a school. It is hot and humid. The air is a little hard to breath but the smell of the hotdogs take over the other scents. Some hotdogs have red ketchup. One has bright yellow mustard, bright red ketchup, and a dark barbeque sauce. Three of the hotdogs have only ketchup. One has no condiments, but the condiments are applied  squiggle. The bun is warm as the heat transfers into the rough texture o f the brown paper towels and into the paper tray. The hotdog is warm in touch and taste and overwhelming in flavour.

Peggy’s Cove
There are brown and gray rocks. Some of the them have been rusted, allowing them an orange colour to appear. The rocks are smooth and plane.On the right, there is a lighthouse. It is white with a red top. There is a balcony at the top. The day is gloomy. The sky is a pale blue and grey. The smell of ocean and salt surrounds everywhere. There is a railing on the right. It smells like the ocean. Imagine the horrible smell of fish, but it is subtle and fresh. That is the smell. The rocks are smooth to touch. They cause friction between the rubber treads of your shoes. The people may be wearing a different colour, but they look as though they are wearing black. There is a little grass or moss on the bottom left. It is not a bright colour, but it is dull. The sound of birds or seagulls maybe rings in the sky. You can hear people talking, but it is quiet because everyone is so far and the space is so open.

Campfire
The picture is taken from above. The fire is warm, but hot when you get too close. It is a burning bright. The flames are orange. Bricks create a circular pit around the first. The orange glow of the fire reflects off the inside of the rock. There are marshmallows roasting over the fire. One of them is white, while another one is beautifully toasted, a perfect golden brown. There is grass around the pout. It looks as though it is nice. There is the smell of fire, of wood burning. There is the smell of the marshmallows – something sweet in the air. The flames are moving in the gentle wind. You can hear people talking around the fire. You can hear the fire crackle. The wood is light brown. Some people are singing. Some of the wood has already burned to ashes a black and white and orange. The grass tickles when you touch it. The bricks are rough to touch, with  little bumps. The marshmallows taste sweet and squishy and kinda gross. 

Fishing Dory
There is a boat. It is bright turquoise. The front of the boat is yellow and brown. A bright blue rope is connected to the front of the boat. The bow rests on a log, which rests on a log. The log is wet. The rest of the boat rests on black and grey stones and gravel. There is a red boat in the distance. The sky is cloudy, and there is a lot of fog. The air smells cold but refreshing. There are lines that trace the boat. The air tastes fresh. It doesn’t smell like a lot, but there is no smell. Not a lot of pollution. The rope feels rough to touch. It is course. The front of the boat is smooth and worn out. The blue parts of the boat seem to have rough little bumps. The log feels smoother. The water feels cold. There are the sounds of the horn of the boat, people chattering, gentle waves rippling, footsteps in the gravel. 

Monarch Butterfly
The monarch butterfly rests on a cluster of purple flowers. The petals are purple, dark and light. There are tubes that reach to the petals. Those are magenta. The petals are smooth, flexible, and bendable.  The butterfly has orange wings. They are more red, closer to the butterfly’s body. The wings are more yellow near the tip of the wing, but the rim of the wings is black with some white spots. The wings have black lines, like veins. Its legs are skinny. There are smooth rocks in the background. They are grey and pink and white and tan. There is the fresh smell of flowers in the air. The sound of rustling leaves from the gentle wind tickle my ears. Again, the air tastes fresh, but I’ve heard that the butterfly tastes bad. The wings are thing, like holding a piece of lined paper in between your fingers. 

The Catcher
There is a little boy. A black hockey helmet – a very old one – covers his age. He has a blue vest, which protects him from the baseballs. There is a gravelon some weeds growing from the gravel. Shadows are casted behind him. The smell of an open field, of fresh grass is present, but when kids are running dust particles are kicked up and reach your nose. You don’t taste anything, but you long for a taste of water of fresh water. The day is approaching evening. He is wearing a short sleeve. It is white with rid rims. There is the sound of a Father telling his son to smile (he has very straight and white teeth; his gums show, too). The rest of the area is pretty quiet though. Some birds call. Some families are chattering. 


Dead Man’s Island
The beaches are just at the edge of the image. You can see 5 red canoes. In the distance there is an island. The island is like a bouquet of pine trees or maybe bruce trees that have been stuck into a flower pot – none other than the great lake. The water is clear when it’s shallow, and you can see the small grains of brown sand – the kind the gets stuck in your toenails and in your bathing suit. In the distance the water is a deepter blue. There are small ripples from the wind. You can hear the wind. You can hear the small waves withdrawing. You can hear people shuffling their feet and talking. The air tastes fresh. The sky is blue. The horizon line is right in the middle. The air smells fresh. You can smell distant trees. 

Quebec City
There is a white door tainted with a bit of yellow. There is a window on the door and a window above the door. Large windows are on the left and right of the door. There are two levels of porches. The bottom of the house is made of orange, coral-coloured bricks. They are a little rough to touch. The upper part of the home is blue. It looks like wood. The paint is smooth to touch. In front of the two large windows, a flower pots that rest on the bottom of the windowsill. There are a couple pink flowers. You can smell the distant bakeries – the smell of croissants, scones, and freshly baked bread that travels up the sidewalk. It is relatively quiet. However, you can hear a little bit of chatter and the sound of cars on the road. You can hear a bicycle ring its bell. What does it taste like? Your tongue gets a subtle taste of the cafes down the street. It is not subtle enough to make your mouth water though. 

Sunrise
Four shadows of children.
Black outline.
There is blue and purple water behind. The horizon is a deep orange colour. 
As it moves up, it becomes a lighter orange, with more hints of orange, and then light blue, and darker blue, and then a deeper blue.
Three of them have their hoods, but the little girl does not. You can see her hair. The water is moving  a little bit. That is the only sound you can hear. 
It smells like sand.
The sand is grainy and cold. It tickles in your hands. It is cold, but they have warm sweaters which warm their bodies. 
It tastes like a refreshing glass of water. 
There are purple cloudson the left. 