Theodore Chiu	
Education: The Key to Harmony Between Indigenous and Settlers
A constant fire of calamity and hatred has been burning between the First Nations people and settlers fo Canada. Though water – various forms of reconciliation – have been poured over the fire, the fire still burns. Only until this fire is extinguished can the Indigenous reach the eights fire, a time of peace and harmon between the two parties. Many people have argued that this eight fire can never be reached because of the cultural genocide in residentail schools crafted by the whites, the racial profiling that continues to exist, and the lack of care and action of the Canadaian government to support Indignous people. The MMIWG and the seven fallen feathers in Northern Ontario investigated and recorded by Tanya Talaga are the perfect depiction of the settlers who continue to pour oil on an already massive flame of distrust. Furthermore, this distrust is rooted in the police and justice system. How can Indigenous people exit this cycle of poverty that was inflicted upon them by settlers – settlers who stole their land? Is it even possible? And what can the Canadian government do? Settlers and Indigenous people can come together in harmony through the government’s effort to sincerely support Indigenous education, while Indigenous people have an open heart to forgive and move on. 
	While propositions like government funding and sincere public apologies are vital towards reconciliation, the key to extinguishing the flame of hatred between the settlers and Indigenous people is education. Both parties must use education to move forward. Take for example the THunder Bay Police. The whole system is a white majority. THe same is with the justice system, whether it is juries, lawyers, or judges. SO, how can Indigenous people provide justice for their own people? They must be in those positions themselves. ADD eg. of either police brutality or jury in SFF.  Indigenous people have a realistic understanding of their people and culture, allowing them to judge fairly with a full picture in mind. Another example lies in the conditions of northern reserves. Mish lacks freshwater and has an unemployment rate of 97% (Talaga 156-157). TO develop these reserves, Indigenous need infrastructure designed for their communities. Indigenous planners, architects, and leaders can provide what First Nations people need, and education is the key to reach these goals. Therefore, only with educated people, and thus, the government’s effort to develop these systems as well as Indigenous people’s desire to embrace these efforts, can Indigenous move out of their cycle of poverty and move into a cycle of harmony with the settlers. 
	It is clear that more effort from the settlers of Canada are needed. However, it is important to recognize truthfully the steps that the Canadian government has taken towards reconciliation. The settlers have offered many Indigenous study courses in schools. This contrast between residential schools is clear. It shows how far Canada has come. From making First Nations reliant on settlers, forcing them to assimilate in order to survive, and taking their language and culture away, Canada has moved to offering courses on Indigenous culture and language. Desmond Brown writes in an article “Ontario has ‘come quite far’ on Indigenous education but there’s much more to be done: report”, “72% of secondary schools reported offering an Indigenous study course” (Brown 1). People for Education director stated, “we have actually come quite far…” (pg.2). Yest, there is still much more that needs to be done to extinguish this flame. 
	Brock P. is a coordinator of Indigenous programs at York University (Brown ?). He explains that one of the major issues within these courses is that the staff and teachers are not effectively trained (). This means that there is potential for cultural and history among the Indigenous lives to be taught incorrectly and not accurately. ALso, there are still schools without these courses. People for Education recommends that these courses be mandated (). Mandating these courses allows for awareness to spread. One of the key players who fought for Indigenous injustices was a lawyer, Falconer. He represented the Indigenous when the government tried to take Stony Point (Talaga 230ish). He wrote to coroner McCalslum to include all seven children in the inquest (Talaga 27)). He grilled Allan Shorock regarding why Jethor Anderon’s case was closed so quickly and why it took 6 days for the police just to begin investigating (Talaga 279). When more people are aware of Indigenous history and their present sufferings, more people –both Indigenous and non Indigenous – will rise up and fight for truth, justice, and reconciliation. There is still so much more the government can do to approach the eighth fire. Peoplery trained staff and mandating Indigenous history culture courses are just a few. 
	First Nations schools still lack governmental stupor. History of SFF of DFC or Pelican and background of article. Funding of provincial schools compared to First Nations schools used to be double (3). Staff are overworked. “Haapa, a history teacher by training, is now tasted with fulfilling the inquest review at DFC (8). Additionally, the stark comparison between Indigenous and non-Indigenous schools is still evident. “When the cost of building materials…with funding from several programs and proposals…cut out bleachers. Meanwhile, a new gym was built at churchill, a provincial school” (4). The difference between Indigenous and non-Indigenous schools is still present. Talaga wrote about the Pikangikum First Nations. 23.5% of Indeginous suicides were here, children are on drugs, poverty is like a widespread virus, and their school was burned down (Talaga (134-136). Furthermore, the government is not only giving more funds to provincial schools, they are giving money to Sri Lanka and not caring about the Pik, who too, have no fresh water (136). The government must turn and start giving proper support by recognizing the news of Indigenous people and helping them before helping other countries. 
	Because education is key for Indigenous people to exit their cycle of poverty, the government must financially support schools for Indigenous kids. “Every March, Indigenous highschools undertake fiscal gymnastics when funding dries up 3 months before the end of the school year” (10). Because of the already issues of being understaffed, chasing funds means less time is present on children, whether it is academic or mental guidance. Stable funding allows cases like Robyn to not repeat. David Foz was overworked and left Robyn after she had been drinking a lot, which led to her death. Part of ORbyn’s death, the root issue per say, lies with the fact that there were not enough financing to support staff to in turn support her. ANother example is “Recently, Matawa had to move its highschool art teacher…”(9). The solution for education in Indigenous communities to be successful lies partially in the government moving towards reconciliation by providing stable funding.
Victorian settlers came. The fur trade began. The fur trade died, and the Indigenous were left helpless, with a feeling that assimilation was the only way to thrive, let alone survive (Talaga 8). Sister of St. Joseph orphanage evolved to residential schools, which evolved to Catholic schools (Talaga 8). Yet, none of these efforts benefitted Indigenous children and communities. Most did the opposite. They created distrust and hatred between the settlers and First Nations people. Radio schools began (Ch.3), and soon there were all-Indigenous-run schools. Reconciliation is still needed, though. Many of these schools are still lacking. The government has improved by offering Indigenous courses, but many schools are still missing these vital courses. Without these courses, people and generations to come cannot become aware of the truth and use their gifts to fight for the truth. Additionally, funding is still needed to allow education — the key for Indigenous to exit their cycle of poverty and substance abuse – to thrive. Staff who are teaching Indigenous language or history courses need to be better trained to avoid the spread of misinformation. With the government’s sincere aid and the Indigenous people’s open heart to forgive and accept the sincere efforts, the eighth fire can be reached. (realized fire analogy didn’t work out 🙁).
