English Notes
Theodore Chiu

12/9/23

Values in the myth of Nanabijou:
Trust
Integrity
Kindness → Hospitality → Generosity
Nature/Animals (conscious and play a role)
Selflessness/ Anti-materialism

Anishinaabe are guided by 7 principles (Anishinaabe=Nishinabe, Ojibwe are a tribe under Anishinaabe):
Love: to know love is to know peace
Respect: to honour all of creation is to have respect.
Bravery: to face life with integrity is to know honesty.
Humility: to accept yourself as a sacred part of creation is to know humility.
Wisdom: to cherish knowledge is to know wisdom. 
Truth:  to know of these things is to know the truth.

60s Scoop: people come at night and take children to school or give to white families (excuse that kids were no in a good living environment). 

Seven Fires Prophecy:
4th: don’t trust outsiders.
5th: someone will offer salvation (Jesus) but accepting means losing your culture. 
If 7th successful, 8th fire will be lit (unity).

15/9/23

Characterization:
Direct: when author/narrator directly tells the reader about character, like descriptions (eg. Pumba is a lonely hog). 
Indirect: when other characters tell/show about the character (eg. everyone ran away from Pumba). 

18/9/23

Annotation: 

Circle words you don’t know
Ask questions
Talk to text (connect back to your life and things you know)
Capture the main idea
Highlight important facts

20/9/23

Unceded land (not given) and treaty land makes up Canada. 
Buffalos were almost wiped out on purpose. 
Indigenous put on reserves (not fertile land), making them rely on Europeans to survive. 

27/9/23

Indigenous and Incarceration:
2nd highest group/ highest by %
Mental health
Poverty
Substance abuse
Generational trauma
Impacts of colonialism

Why turn to substance abuse?
Peer pressure
Grif
Lack of education
Thrill seeking
traumas/self-medication
Social glorification
Reduce stress
Temporal happiness
Medication to addiction
Dealing with homelessness
Poverty
Social equalizer

29/9/23

Homage: pay respect, honour

Norval Morisseau’s Art: symmetry, outside/inside portrayal, vibrant colours, ancestors. 
Androgyny: in between

Why have Star of David in SFF painting?
To show that there was some positive effect of Christianity in residential schools. 
To show martyrdom and suffering.

2/10/23

Rhetoric: art of persuasion (ethos, pathos, logos)

Mood: how the reader feels.
Tone: author’s view. 

3/10/23

Rhetorical Precis:
SFF eg.

Sentence 1 (who/what):
Tanya Talaga, in the non-fiction book, Seven Fallen Feathers, claims that unresolved deaths, social injustices, lack of education, abuse, substance use, especially in northern Canada, are the result of colonialism, intergenerational trauma, systemic racism, and lack of government support. 
Sentence 2 (how):
Talaga supports her assertion by sharing details of each student’s death, historical context, and neglect of the Thunder Bay police and government. 
Sentence 3 (why):
The author's purpose is to create awareness of Indigenous suffering and governmental neglect in order to bring change in the educational system and avoid repetition of history, bringing reconciliation between the First Nations and settlers. 
Sentence 4 (to whom):
The author writes in a critical and compassionate tone for educated adults, secondary schools, police, and the government.

6/10/23

Types of Writing:

Expository: writing tries to reveal information and facts, topics, laid out logically, usually no bias. (tone = informative). 
eg. textbooks, research papers. 
Descriptive: giving lots of sensory details, using sensory language, to visualize/mentally picture, figurative language.
Persuasive: bring the reader over to your POV, rhetorical appeal, persuade you onto their side. 
Argumentative: to support a claim, make an argument supported with facts and evidence. (Discursive writing: argumentative but present both sides equally, tries to be unbiased, conclusion at end). 
Narrative: tells a story, story ark (plot triangle) whether fiction or nonfiction. 
Plot Triangle: exposition (setting, intro characters, mood) → (before rising, usually introduce conflict) rising action → climax → falling action → resolution (denouement conclusion, resolve conflict → catharsis).

12/10/23

Types of Thesis:
Explicit/Hard: claim because of x, y, z. (set # of ideas, clear).
Don’t say “this paper will…”
Implicit/Soft: gives argument without x, y, z (when argument is not so ‘cut and dry’, not as linear).
Key element: topic, focus.
Text: context.
MWOW (big idea and author’s take): analysis. 

eg. Hamilton from Mrs.Choi

Components: 
Key Element: characterization via internal conflict.
Text: monologues
MWOW = (legacy + Author Thinks or is trying to say about that idea)

In the musical, Hamilton, Lin Manuel Miranda uses revealing monologues to highlight his eponymous protagonist’s all-consuming ambitions. Miranda emphasizes the internal conflict in character asides to negotiate the importance and cost of legacy, revealing the author’s belief that a life lived for others is the noblest ambition. 

30/10/23

Narrative Poetry:
Narrator is called speaker.
There are characters, plot, dialogue, figurative language.

Allegory: a narrative or text with a sustained semantic reference to another narrative or text.
Allusion: indirect reference to something (text, or play, song, historical event) which the reader is supposed to be familiar. . 
Anecdote: a brief recounting of a relevant episode. Used in fiction and nonfiction to develop a point or for humour. 
-Diction: word choice, particularly as an element of style (eg. formal, informal, ornate, plain).
-Colloquial: ordinary or familiarity type of conversation. A colloquialism is a common or family type of saying (similar to adage and aphorism).  
-Connotation: rather than dictionary definition (denotation), it is the associations suggested by a word. Implied, rather than literal meaning. 
-Jargon: the diction used by a group which practices a similar profession or activity. 
-Vernacular: language or dialect of a particular country or clan/group or just plain everyday speech. 
Euphemism: a more agreeable or less offensive substitute for generally unpleasant words. 
Figurative language: opposite of literal language, writing that is not meant to be taken literally. 
-Analogy: comparison of one pair of variables to a parallel set of variables.
-Hyperbole: exaggeration. 
-Metonymy:  replacing an actual word or idea, with a related word or concept. eg. I could not understand his tongue (tongue = language). Synecdoche: a type of metonymy when a  whole is represented by naming one of its parts or vice versa. eg. check out my new wheels.
-Personification: giving human-like characteristics to something that is not human.
-Simile: using like or as to make a direct comparison between two very different things. 
-Synesthesia: a description involving a ‘crossing of senses’. eg. a purplish scent. 
Imagery: word or words that create a picture in the reader’s mind. 5 senses. 
Irony: When the opposite of what you expect to happen does. (verbal: say something and mean something opposite/different, dramatic: when audience knows something character doesn’t, situational: found in plot/story line)
Juxtaposition: placing things side by side for comparison. Used to make a point. 
Mood: the atmosphere created by the literature and accomplished through word choice. 
Motif: recurring idea in a piece of literature. 
Oxymoron: when apparently contradictory terms are grouped together and suggest a paradox. eg. jumbo shrimp. 
Paradox: a seemingly contradictory situation which is actually true. 
Parallelism: aka parallel structure or balanced sentences, sentence construction which places equal grammatical constructions near each other, or repeats identical grammatical patterns. Used to add emphasis, organization, and sometimes pacing.
-Anaphora: repetition of word, phrase, or clause at the beginning of two or more sentences or clauses in a row. eg. I came, I saw, I conquered. 
-Antithesis: two opposite or contrasting words, phrases, or clauses, or even ideas, with parallel structure. eg. It was the best of times. It was the worst of times. 
-Chiasmus: when the same words are used twice in succession, but 2nd time, order of words is reversed. eg. when the going gets tough, the tough get going. 
-Zeugma (Syllepsis): when a single word governs or modifies two or more other words, and the meaning of the first word must change for each of the other words it governs or modifies. eg.  The butler killed the lights, and then the mistress. 
Parody: exaggerated imitation of a serious work for humorous purposes. 
Poetic devices: a device used in poetry to manipulate the sound of words, sentences or lines. 
-Alliteration, assonance, consonance, onomatopoeia, rhyme…)
Syntax: grammatical arrangement of words. 
Understatement: the ironic minimizing of fact, understatement presents something as less significant than it is. 
-Litotes: type of understatement, generated by denying the opposite of the statement which otherwise would be used. eg. Hitting that telephone pole certainly didn’t do your car any good. 

3/11/23
Poetry Explication:

Structure
Word choice
Imagery
Figurative language
Theme and Tone

Speaker
Occasion
Audience
Purpose
Subject
Tone

Title initial
Paraphrase
Connotation
Attitude
Shift
Title after
Theme

16/11/23

Blank Verse: iambic pentameter, does not rhyme.
Narrative: tells a story, epics are long form. 
Sonnet: 14 lines with internal rhyme, 3 quatrains (abcd), 1 couplet (zz), 10 syllables per line, iambic pent. 
Free Verse: no consistent meter or rhyme.
Haiku: three lines of 5-7-5 syllables. 
Pastoral Poetry: usually about natural worlds, landscape, idealized life of shepherd. 
Ode: tribute to subject. 
Lyric: (broad category) feeling and emotion. 
Dramatic: written in verse (broad term for stanzas, devices, etc…) meant to be acted/recited. 
Ballad: poetic or musical storytelling. 
Villanelle: 19 lines (5 tercets, 1 quatrain), specific internal rhyme, intense topics. 
Limerick: 5 line poem (aabba), usually comedic. 

Enjambment: run 2 or more lines together without terminal punctuation. Opposite of end-stopping. (jambe= leg, enjambe = to step over, lines running over).
Uses: mood, tension/momentum, surprise reader (plot twist), rhythm. 
Caesura: in classical poetry, space between 2 words contained within a metrical foot. Today,it is a pause, often in the middle of a phrase (medial) and signaled usually by punctuation. (scansion mark ||).
Used: disrupt thought and flow, emphasize something, create pause for breath, contrast idea, extend meaning. 

17/11/23

Shofar: Jewish Ram Horn, call to prayer when enemy comes. 
Stations of the Cross: usually on Good Friday, 12-14 stations take out things Jesus encountered to the cross for meditation. Each station has an image and verse. 

20/11/23

Spoken Word Poetry: rhythm, repetition, enjambement (for suspense), not much rhyme scheme, pacing, volume levels, expressive, blocking, consonance. 

21/11/23

Laissez-faire: fewer regulation in economics, economy will balance itself. 

7/12/23

Hamilton: historical fiction

8/1/24

Media Literacy:
Access
Analyze
Evaluate
Create
Act

5 Questions of Media Literacy:

Who created the message? (who paid for it?)
Which techniques are used to attract my attention?
How might different people interpret this message?
Which lifestyles, values, and points of view are represented or missing?
Why is this message being sent?

Purpose of Hamilton
