Fahrenheit 451
“It was a pleasure to burn.”

Themes: Dystopia, Censorship, Technology, and Information
451: The temperature at which books burn symbolizes when society burns. 
Book Summary: https://www.litcharts.com/lit/fahrenheit-451/part-1

PART 1:
The Hearth and the Salamander: symbolize fire. Hearth (fireplace) represents home, except there is now no real community in families. Salamander (name of Montag’s truck) in mythology could live in fire unharmed. It is ironic because Montag does not live unharmed by fire as he sees how burning books ruins society and home. 

Characters:
Guy Montag:
30 years old, began working as a fireman at 20. 
Mildred:
Obsessed with the parlour walls and always has Seashell radios in her ear. 
Clarisse McLellan: 
Catalyst that speeds up the change in Montag
Fridging: character dies to advance the main character’s motivation. 
“She didn’t want to know how a thing was done, but why” (Bradbury 57). 
Captain Beatty
The Hound

Facts:
Electronic Eyed Snake is the machine that ‘cleaned’ Mildred.
Clarris died by being run over by a car.
Beatty’s car is Phoenix.
Big Flue are the incinerators. 
Montag can keep book for 24 hr.
There used to be front porches but taken to prevent social relations. 
Salamander on arm, phoenix disk.

Questions:
Describe the society in which Montag lives. What makes it dystopian?
Books are banned and burned. People have short attention spans. People are obsessed with the parlour walls and go to Fun Parks. They do not think. Questions are not asked. Children kill each other (27). People say the same things, same jokes, and pictures no longer have meaning. Dystopian because the society presents itself as a utopia, where people are ignorantly happy. People like Mildred are content but are blind to their addiction. There is also a restriction of information as books are banned. And restriction of right to own a book, let alone read a book. Last, the technology (Seashells and Parlour Walls) are advanced for its time.
Why do you think the job of the fireman has changed in this society?
Because as technology advances, homes are fireproofed. More importantly, when people are caught up in thoughtless fast media, they would not want to be compared to an intellect, because deep down, they know they cannot compare. Thus, the elimination of books and the new role of firemen is needed to make sure all people are equal and happy. 
Describe Clarisse.
17. She thinks and notices the world around her. She tastes the rain, sees the dew on the grass, and the 200ft long billboards. Her family can just sit and talk. Clarisses also asks lots of questions, like if Montag is happy, why he doesn’t have children, how he became a fireman. She likes to observe people, sharp contrast to selfish and thoughtless Mildred, who is stuck in the confines of the parlour wall.
Describe Mildred.
Mildred is addicted to the parlour walls. She has little seashell radios that are constantly playing and feeding her information. In the novel, Mildred overdosed on sleeping pills. For Mildred her script is greater importance than Guy. I do not hate her, but I do pity how her meaning in life is something of so little importance. It is just constant, mindless entertainment that fills her life. I pity her because she is unaware of her issues.
What is the Hound? What does it symbolize?
The 8-legged Mechanical Hound is kept in a kennel in the firehouse; it has a large needle that can paralyze. Used as entertainment to catch mice/gamble. Montag is afraid of hound unlike other firefighters because of the guilt of taking books and hiding them. The Hound can sense Montag’s guilt for taking the books, or maybe it is in his mind. In part 2, when the Hound is gone, there is not more guilt and instead confidence within Montag (101). Symbolizes authority (one of fear) of government.
How has Montag changed by the end of Part 1?
Montag finds it a pleasure to burn books in the beginning of the book. However, Montag has always had an underlying desire and curiosity for books as evident from the books behind the ventilator grill. Later, he realizes he has no relationship with his wife. As he begins to think and contemplate; he realizes the effects of his actions, how he burned thousands of books, and even the woman. He thinks, “There must be something in books, things we can’t imagine, to make a woman stay in a burning house” (Bradbury 48). At the end of part 1, he finally takes action and begins to read, seeking to find something in books. 

Quotations:
“One time, as a child, in a power failure, his mother had found and lit a last candle and there had been a brief hour of rediscovery, of such illumination that space lost its vast dimensions and drew comfortably around them, and they, mother and son, alone, transformed, hoping that the power might not come on again too soon…” (Bradbury 5). At the end of the same page, when Clarisse asks Montag if he ever read any of the books he burned, Montag only replied that it was against the law. 

“He was not happy. He said the words to himself. He recognized this as the true state of affairs. He wore his happiness like a mask and the girl had run off across the lawn with the mask and there was no way of going to knock on her door and ask for it back” (Bradbury 9). 

“When I talk, you look at me” (Bradbury 21).

“It’s a fine bit of craftsmanship, a good rifle that can fetch its own target and guarantees the bull’s-eye every time” (Bradbury 25).

“But they all say the same things and nobody says anything different from anyone else. And most of the time in the caves they have the joke-boxes on and the same jokes most of the time…All abstract…A long time ago pictures said things” (Bradbury 28). 

“Montag had done nothing. His hand had done it all, his hand, with a brain of its own, with a conscience and a curiosity in each trembling finger, had turned thief” (Bradbury 35). 

“It didn’t come from the government down. THere was no dictum, no declaration, no censorship, to start with, no! Technology, mass exploitation, and minority pressure carried the trick… (Bradbury 56).

“We must all be alike. Not everyone born free and equal, as the Constitution says, but everyone made equal. Each man the image of every other; then all are happy, for there are no mountains to make them cower, to judge themselves against. So! A book is a loaded gun in the house next door. Burn it…there was no longer need for firemen for the old purposes. They were given the new job, as custodians of our peace of mind…” (Bradbury 56-57).

“The home environment can undo a lot you try to do at school. That’s why we’re almost snatching them from the cradle” (Bradbury 57).

“If you don’t want a man unhappy politically, don’t give him two sides to a question to worry him; give him one…Cram them full of non-combustible data…they’ll get a sense of motion without moving” (Bradbury 58) 

“Any man who can take a TV wall apart and put it back together again, and most men can, nowadays, is happier than any man who tries to slide rule, measure, and equate the universe, which just won’t be measure or equated without making man feel bestial and lonely” (Bradbury 58). 

The Allegory of the Cave

PART 2:
The Sieve and the Sand:
Symbolizes Montag’s efforts to learn and understand what he reads. He is like a child trying to fill a sieve with sand. Sand is the knowledge that escapes from him. The sieve is his mind trying to make the knowledge permanent, trying to memorize the content of the book he reads, but he finds it difficult, if not impossible. 

Faber’s Reading Conditions (pg.80):
Quality, texture of information
Leisure, time to think and digest information
The right to carry out actions based on what we learn from the interaction of the first two. 

Characters:
Faber:
Mrs. Bowles: has children but ‘real’ birth wasn’t worth it so got a c-section.
Mrs. Phelps: married 3x, doesn’t care too much about husband.

Facts:
9 school day/10 day week
Card playing = high stakes

Questions:

Where is Montag at the cave now?
Montag is in the stage of pain, confusion, and frustration as he cannot understand the knowledge he is reading. Faber is helping him get out of the cave and adapt to the light, and Montag is trying to ‘unchain’ Mildred, Mrs. Phelps, and Mrs. Bowles with little success. 
Why is Faber anxious when he first meets Montag? What does this tell us about Montag’s society as a whole?
Faber is scared because Montag is a fireman. This shows that a portion of society is built on fear. Montag’s society either lives in ignorance or fear (for those who have knowledge). It also shows that there is little trust in society. Faber was scared when he first met Montag as well. 
Why does Faber tell Montag the story of Hercules and Antaeus?
Fabers tells this to show that society cannot function/live/thrive without the knowledge that was society’s strength and ground. Antaeus only has strength from the ground, like how society's strength comes from knowledge/books/reason/education. Society will die without it. You need dirt to plant things (even though it isn’t pretty). 
Identify and explain the clear allusion to Macbeth in this section of the text. 
Metaphor for guilt. Washing his hands because he feels Beatty can his guilt. Macbeth talks about all water cannot clean his hands after he murders the king. Both Montag and Macbeth are consumed by guilt; they can’t ‘wash’ it off. But Montag’s guilt is a different type. 
Identify and explain the biblical references in this section?
“Consider the lilies how they grow: they toil not, they spin not; and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these” (Luke 12:27) -  first book that montag reads. represent Montag’s growing frustration with the emptiness of the world around him, and his desire to find meaning or grounded in a deeper more purposeful reality. 

Ecclesiastes (written by Solomon maybe) - “Everything is meaningless: – like Montag’s society and the things they value. Asides from God, everything is meaningless. 

“Christ has become ‘down dressed’ and now is part of the parlour family.” - No need to get rid of Jesus; just change Jesus to fit into the government’s molded society. 

Other references: Ruth, Revelations, Gospels, Job.

Ruth:
Bradbury mentions the book of Ruth from the Bible to provide a comparison between the lives of Montag and Ruth. The book of Ruth tells the story of Naomi and her widowed daughter-in-law, Ruth. Elimelech, the husband of Naomi, as well as Naomi’s two sons are dead. Naomi and Ruth return to Bethlehem; however, they are not wealthy, and Ruth must go to the fields to glean the wheat after harvesters collect the grain. One of the fields Ruth gleans on belongs to Boaz, a relative of Naomi’s husband, who shows Ruth kindness; he even tells the harvesters to purposely leave some grain for Ruth. Eventually, Boaz redeems Ruth by marrying her. In Fahrenheit 451, Montag’s society is poor in wisdom, for they have no books. However, as the novel progresses, Montag begins to become ‘redeemed.’  Bradbury mentions the book of Ruth on purpose. He is comparing the situations of Montag and Ruth. First, Montag tries to read by himself. This is like Ruth going to the fields to pick up leftover wheat by herself. Both Montag and Ruth are trying to succeed by themselves. However, they are unable to achieve much success. Next, there is the ‘redeeming’ character. In Fahrenheit 451, Faber gives guidance and teaches Montag how to think. This is like Boaz helping Ruth. Lastly, both Montag and Ruth do not have a community. Montag has realized that there is no love and relationship between him and his wife, Mildred. On the other hand, Ruth is Moabite, who travels to Bethlehem, entering a strange and foreign community for her. Additionally, Ruth’s husband has died, and her sister-in-law, who is a Moabite, has taken a different path. However, at the end of the book, both Montag and Ruth are redeemed through the help of Faber and Boaz, where they find a home. Montag finds a community, and Ruth finds a family. Thus, the connection between the book of Ruth and Bradbury’s Fahrenheit 451 is found in Montag’s and Ruth’s efforts to try to succeed by themselves, their redeemer, and their finding of a community. 

Explain the significance of Dover Beach.
The effect of reading Dover Beach is 3-fold. Mrs. Phelps cries. Mrs. Bowles gets mad. And Mildred calls the firemen. 

First half of the poem is a description of the sea. It is calm, and beautiful but Matthew Arnold describes the tides of having a melancholy notion. 
Second half of the poem (part in F451) calls back toa a time when the Sea of Faith was full. Maybe reference to religion or goodness/faithfulness of humanity. He is pointing to something that has been loss (retreated or withdrawn like the tide).
Last stanza about love. Maybe directed to wife Frances Lucy. “Let us be true to one another.” World is lost and no longer good, but for the poet and his love, they have the choice to be faithful to each other (personal sea of faith). There is still hope. 

This connects to F451 because society has lost this “Sea of Faith,” no light joy, goodness, or faith. Mrs. Phelps is on her third husband, another loveless relationship. Mrs. Phelps' husband is at war and the poem closes by telling that “ignorant armies clash at night” (original name of book). This is why she cries. 

Thoughts on Mrs. Phelps and Mrs. Bowles.
“Mrs. Phelps was crying…” (97). This shows that Mrs. Phelps has some past subconscious understanding of the poem. Mrs. Bowles thinks that poetry makes people cry and suicidal. Could this be because it causes a person to have this feeling that their comfortability is truly ignorance and that it cannot compare to knowledge?
How has Montag changed by the end of the text? Is he growing?
Yes, he is growing. He wants to understand what he is reading, so he seeks help from Faber. His frustration leads him to make foolish decision – like reading on the subway and  in front of Mrs. Bowles and PHelps. However, this is an outcome of his want to ‘unchain’ others. He begins to see the value of books and wants to preserve it. 

PART 3:
The hero fights back, challenging the very world he lives in. 

Burning Bright:
In F451, fire = destruction. However, usually the warmth of a fire is a positive thing. Burning bright may suggest burning without providing the positive element of heat. However, burning bright may be seen positively as it is the light outside the cave which allows Montag to be enlightened. Beatty and the firemen burn, society burns – all of this helps Montag to see the light of the truth. 

Characters:
Granger (author) - “I am Plato’s Republic”
Fred Clement
Dr. Simmons
Prof. West
Reverend Padover
Harris in Youngstown

Questions:

Montag is forced to burn his home. Is it a pleasure to burn?
“And as before, it was good to burn…put away the senseless problem” (110). For Montag, he is burning and empty house (one that brings back memories of an empty relation with Mildred, no love, just Mildred and her obsession with parlour walls). 

There are 2 instances of burning. 
When Montag burns his house
Beatty tries to make it a negative thing for Montag, but for Montag, it is a positive experience because he has no emotional attachment to his home. He is destroying his old life. The cold marriage burns the brightest (bedroom). Catharsis: healthy emotional release/ expurgation of oneself’s fear and pity. Aristotle’s idea for why we enjoy tragedy and theater (venue to release emotions).
“The books, Montag” - This quote could either be Faber (don’t burn the books!) or Beatty (burn the books!).
When Montag burns Beatty
What are your thoughts with regards to Beatty;s death? Did he want to die?
Beatty did not even try to stop Montag from killing him. Instead, he just kept making Montag more mad, so I would say he did not care that much about life. Maybe because deep down (because he does have all this knowledge) that there is no point of life in this society. But Beatty also didn’t expect Montag to burn him either. “Beatty wanted to die” (116). It is important to remember what Montag’s society is like. It is common for people to jump off buildings. Mildred was likely trying to commit suicide when she overdosed on sleeping pills. Beatty may have been in the same boat and was depressed deep down.
What event can be viewed as Montag’s symbolic baptism?
When he enters the river.
Anointing with alcohol.
Put off old clothes/put on Faber’s clothes (fireman → academic).
Burn down house (burn down/die to past self)
Granger gives Montag something to drinks which changes his scent.
Where did Montag and Mildred meet? Why is it important that he suddenly remembers?
Chicago. After the city is bombed, Montag imagines Mildred screaming and pities her and almost does have some love for her because she may have died from the bomb, which sparkes him to remember Chicago. For the first time, Montag is able to think. There is no parlour wall or fear of the Hound or Denham’s Dentifrice to distract him. He gets to pause and think and remember. 
Explain the conversation about mirrors? What is the potential significance?
Mirrors show reflection/get people to examine themselves. We (soceity) will never grow unless we take a long look at ourselves. 
Explain the phoenix allusion. What is the significance?
Society is like the phoenix, constantly getting burned and going through cycles of rebirth. Except society knows the past and history and foolish mistakes it has made, but still keeps choosing to repeat the destructive cycle. Bradbury is also writing after WW1 and WW2, where there was enormous destruction. Society constantly destroys itself until people see books and remember/learn from the past. 
Explain the use of Ecclesiastes.
Ecclesiastes echoes how everything in Montag’s society is meaningless. The conclusion of Ecclesiastes: Fear God and keep his commandments. For Fahrenheit,
Explain the use of Revelation.
Revelation is the last book of the Bible, points to restoration. “Tree of Life” points back to Eden, where everything was perfect. There are seasons of breaking and building, but in the end, there will be healing (like Revelation tells us).
What do you think of the ending? Is it satisfying? Leave you wanting more? Overly optimistic?
Satisfying. Closure but makes me want to know what Montag and the others will do in the city. 
How has Montag changed over the course of the text? Where does he stand now with regards to the allegory of the cave?
Montag is out of the cave and sees the light of truth. Before, it was a pleasure to burn books. Then, he met Clarisse, who was a catalyst, and helped him think. Eventually, he realized that there was some value to books, but he didn’t fully understand. He tried to understand, but was only successful when Faber helped him. Then, he tried to ‘unchain’ others (Phelps, Bowles, and Mildred) but was unsuccessful. Now, he is out of the cave, and he has become the book of Ecclesaistes. He sees how everything is meaningless. 
Clarisse was the catalyst that unchained him or sped his way to the mouth of the cave. Faber was the one who was at the mouth of the cave with Montag. He was the one who was with Montag when he experienced “pain and rage and blindness.” Finally, Granger is the one is with Montag out of the cave guiding him so that Montag will be able to “look at the sun itself.”