













Dissecting a Fetal Pig Lab Report



















Theodore Chiu
Daniel Shi
SBI3U
Biology 11
April 29, 2024
Mrs. S. Tam
Introduction:
	
	The purpose of this experiment was to explore and investigate the structure and function of the digestive, respiratory, and circulatory systems of the fetal pig. The purpose of the digestive system is to break down food into smaller particles that can be absorbed into the bloodstream. The purpose of the respiratory system is to provide the body with oxygen and dispel carbon dioxide out of the cells. Lastly, the purpose of the circulatory system is to transport nutrients, waste, and gases, as well as regulate body temperature. 
	A dissection involves an examination of the internal structure and the construction of an organism. Through dissections, biologists can determine the location, as well as the interaction between the different systems and organs.
	Pigs are in the class of Mammalia. Fetal pigs are used in this dissection. Though the pigs are unborn and still nourished by their mother, they have a complete internal system. The fetal pig’s internal structure is similar to many other placental mammals and closely resembles a human’s internal structure as well. 

Materials:

Disposable plastic gloves
Preserved fetal pig
String
Plastic bag (to store specimen)
Newspaper
Paper towels
Apron
Dissecting tray
Scalpel
Small tongs
Scissors
Probe
Small dropper

Procedure:

Refer to Mcgraw-Hill Ryerson Biology 11.
Blake, L., & Galbraith, D. I. (2002). McGraw-Hill Ryerson Biology 11. McGraw-Hill    	
	Ryerson. 
*T-pins were not used to hold the skin of the fetal pig back. 
Results:

Refer to the Observation Table and Fetal Pig Dissection Diagrams attached at the back of the report. 

Discussion/Analysis:

Upon studying the mouth of the fetal pig, there were some differences between the fetal pig’s mouth and the human mouth. The mouth of the human is wider than the mouth of the fetal pig, while the fetal pig’s mouth is longer and narrower. A reason for this could be because pigs have to rummage in the dirt for food. So, to find food deeper in the ground, they would need a longer snout and mouth.  Secondly, humans have a lot more teeth, many of which are not as sharp. Only four teeth were observed in the dissection. However, fetal pigs may not have many teeth because they are unborn and still rely on their mother for nutrition, meaning they do not have a need to chew food. Humans also have a more defined lip structure. Perhaps, this could be related to human phonation and the ability to speak in a more complex way. Lastly, the tongue of the pig is a lot thicker and likely stronger, compared to a human’s tongue. This could be because a pig’s diet requires them to be able to move more food in their mouth compared to humans. The mouth is an important feature to analyze because it is where digestion begins. 
There are multiple major steps in the digestive process. First, the mouth mechanically breaks down food into smaller pieces using the teeth. Amylase, an enzyme in the saliva, breaks down starches into simpler sugars. Next, food travels down the esophagus, a muscular tube connecting the mouth to the stomach. At this stage, the chewed food is called bolus. Then, mechanical digestion occurs due to the churning of the stomach, while chemical digestion occurs due to the gastric juices that continue to break down food. Pepsin, an enzyme in the gastric juice, breaks down proteins into polypeptides.  At this stage, food is called chyme, a thick liquid made of broken-down food and gastric juices. Next, food enters the small intestine. There are three parts of the small intestine: the duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum. In the duodenum, there are many folds and villi to aid in absorption. Furthermore, secretions from the pancreas and gallbladder help break down nutrient macromolecules into their component molecules. In the jejunum, nutrients are absorbed, and proteins and carbohydrates are broken down further. Once the chyme reaches the ileum, the undigested food is pushed into the large intestine. In the large intestine, 90% of the water is absorbed back into the body. Furthermore, anaerobic bacteria make important vitamins, like vitamin K and B. Feces is stored in the rectum, until it is released through the anal canal. 
The 3 systems in this experiment are connected in various ways. The respiratory system and the circulatory system work together.  When a human breathes in, they breathe in oxygen. Oxygen is needed for cellular respiration. There is a high concentration of oxygen that moves to the alveoli. The capillaries have a low concentration of oxygen compared to the alveoli. As a result, oxygen is able to diffuse from the alveoli into the capillaries. After this occurs, the blood in the capillaries travels to the heart and to other cells.  The blood from the capillaries and the body cells go through gas exchange. This is called internal respiration. Through the interconnectedness of the respiratory and circulatory system, oxygen is able to be brought to the cells of the body. 
The digestive system and circulatory systems also work together. The function of the digestive system is to break down food into small and soluble units, so that it can be absorbed into the bloodstream. Once the food is broken down and absorbed in the bloodstream, it travels through the arteries, veins, and capillaries, and transports nutrients to cells throughout the body. The cells can then use the essential nutrients to grow and function. Without the digestive system, food would not be able to be broken down into smaller particles. Without the circulatory system, nutrients from the food would not be able to be transported to the cells. Thus, this is a way the digestive and circulatory system work together. 
The digestive system and respiratory system also work together. Cellular respiration is a necessary chemical process that provides energy to cells through chemical reactions. The reactants of this process are glucose and oxygen, and the products are carbon dioxide, water and energy. Glucose is a simple sugar that is a carbohydrate. It is an essential nutrient, meaning that the human body cannot make it, and it must be obtained from food. The digestive system breaks down carbohydrates into simpler forms. Saliva in the mouth has amylase which breaks down polysaccharides into disaccharides. Polysaccharides and disaccharides are further broken down in the small intestine by other carbohydrases, such as pancreatic amylase and maltase. On the other hand, oxygen is brought into the lungs through inspiration. Through external and internal respiration, oxygen is able to be brought to the cells. Thus, the digestive and respiratory system work together because the digestion breaks down sugars and the respiratory system brings in oxygen, which are both necessary for cellular respiration to take place. 
Additionally, the function and appearance of the different organs are also related. Refer to the Function and Relation Column in the Observation Table attached at the back of the report. 
There were some sources of error and uncertainty in this experiment. Both the veins and arteries were not very visible as evident from the Observation Table. Furthermore, the veins and arteries were hard to distinguish from each other. Secondly, the incision on the ventral surface of the heart was not done in a single cut, which may have caused some obstruction to the appearance of the valves and chambers of the heart. 
If this experiment were performed again, the next steps would be to analyze and dissect the brain of the fetal pig. Furthermore, different organs, such as the skin or liver, would be investigated under a microscope to further understand the structure and make-up of the different parts of the pig on a micro-level. 

Conclusion:

In conclusion, the digestive, respiratory, and circulatory systems of a fetal pig were explored. Through investigation, the location, structure, appearance, and interconnectedness of the organs and systems were studied. For example, gas exchange in humans is a way the respiratory system and circulatory system are connected, and cellular respiration is a way the digestive system and respiratory system are connected. Through hands-on exploration of the fetal pig, the beauty and intricacies of the different systems were analyzed, pointing to an intelligent design by an all-powerful Creator. 
Studying the different systems of a fetal pig is important in the real world because it allows humans to have a better understanding of their own systems. It can lead humans not only to understand their systems better, but change the ways in which they live, so that their systems can function more healthily. For example, understanding the workings of the digestive system is the first step towards healthy eating. For example, if a person does not know how their body reacts to trans-unsaturated fatty acids, they may keep eating it without knowing the harms it has on their body.  Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health is one of the lead researchers in nutrition. Only with researching and understanding the functions of the digestive system, how it breaks down certain foods, and how it connects to the other systems can further research be done on health, nutrition, and proper dieting. Thus, it is important to know how the digestive system functions in order to determine what foods are best for your body. Research regarding fecal transplants have also been studied in recent years. Fecal transplants are done when the good bacteria in the colon are killed, and Clostridium difficile, a harmful bacteria, takes over. Studying the digestive system is also connected to research in fecal transplants. Therefore, studying the different systems have a large impact on the real world, as well as a connection to research. 







References:
Blake, L., & Galbraith, D. I. (2002). McGraw-Hill Ryerson Biology 11. McGraw-Hill    	
	Ryerson. 
Fecal transplant. Johns Hopkins Medicine. (2022, April 4). 
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/treatment-tests-and-therapies/fecal-transplant#:~:text=Fecal%20transplantation%20is%20a%20procedure,bacteria%20into%20the%20recipient’s%20intestines. 
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. (n.d.). https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/ 

