November 13, 2024

Lewis Carroll (Charles Dodgson)
Theologian and mathematician
Colleague had 3 daughters and Lewis made friends with children (like uncle)
Had a good friendship with Alice Liddell (youngest of 3)
They took a boat ride on the river Isis. Alice asks for a story, and tells a story of Alice in the Underground. Eventually, Alice asks for a copy of the book. Eventually it was published in 1865. 

What makes a book great? (class discussion)
Relatable 
Makes you think/inspires change
Depth
Novel (not cliche)
Plot → moral

Some say: Best seller? Multiple printings and languages? Part of cultural zeitgeist (German for spirit of the culture of the time)? Well written? Engaging world? Memorable characters? Multiple layers of meaning? 
The Davinci Code? 
This criteria doesn’t work out?

Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland
Never been out of print since 1865
Translated into 170+ languages
Part of the cultural zeitgeist
“Down the rabbit hole” 
“Off with their hands”
“...in wonderland”
“Mad as a hatter”
“Curiouser and curiouser”
Alice in Borderland
Well written. Wordplay, nonsense, puns, and political satire.
Multiple layers of meaning. Memorable characters? 

Jabberwocky
Poem by Lewis Caroll in the Through the Looking Glass
What is Lewis trying to portray with nonsense?

Inspiration: A Myth Repurposed?
Persephone (goddess of spring, daughter of Demeter)
“In a field with Demeter…”
Earth opens and Hades grabs Persephone (like Alice down the rabbit hole)
Easter
Persephone related to Ostara (symbolized of having a rabbit) =  Easter bunny
Celtic tradition of Phooka (trickster animal)
Guide people to underworld
Psychopomp
Ancient Greek: a guide of souls to the underworld. 
Midsummer Night’s Dream painting there is a white rabbit. White rabbit inspires Caroll. 

Carroll and Math
Conservative mathematician (euclidean geometry) and opposed math of his day (Victoria Era) of imaginary numbers and conceptual/theoretical algebra.
Many math easter eggs
Axioms: “Sentence first, verdict afterwards!” (Queen of Hearts)
Propositional calculus reference: formula first, then conclusion (axiom)
Axiom = axe (off with their heads)
Golden Key: Golden Ration
Hatter’s Hat: Fermat’s Theorem (things increasing/decreasing in size).
Postmodernism (take meaning from breakdown of structure)

Quotes
“I know who I was when I got up this morning, but I think I must have been changed several times since then.” (identity)
Some people say AiW is Bildungsroman: coming of age story
“Alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really impossible.” (impossible vs. possible, real vs. imaginary)

Rabbit Holes
Childhood into adolescent? Identity and puberty?
Satire on politics of time?
Satire on 19th century math?
Trauma story?
Metaphor for pregnancy?
Story about sex? Drugs?
Dream scape?
Critique of Victorian England?
Children books always moral and religion
Very different
Alice in Wonderland not have this: just fun and adventure
Alice talks to herself
“‘And what is the use of a good book,’ thought Alice, ‘without pictures or conversations?”
Fun
Illustrated by Sir John Tenniel.

Through the Looking Glass
Published in 1871
Drawing from chess (plot points like chess moves)
“Why, sometimes I’ve believed as many as siz impossible things before breakfast.”


