Judaism Notes
Theodore Chiu
March, 2024

Second CommonWealth, Transition to Rabbinic Judaism
(587 BC - 70 AD)
Solomon’s temple - 975 BC (7 years of labour)
Functionally and spiritually the same.
Destroyed by Babylonians in 587 BC.

Short History of Jewish Persecution:
🙁722 BC: Assyrians
🙁587 BC: Babylonians, temple destroyed
🙂539 BC: The Persians, Jews allowed to return to land and rebuild temple/ wall.
🙁300 BC: Greeks, A. the Great, Seleucids, attempt to Hellenize (live the Greek way), successful
🙂167 BC: Maccabean Revolt (maccabees - hammer), Jewish family lead revolt and are successful
	165 BC: temple rededicated
	100 years of peace and unity (Hasmonean Kingdom)
🙂The Romans: Herod’s extensive renovation of the temple
	🙁70 AD: Romans destroy 2nd temple. 

Roman Occupation:
Jewish life characterized by:
Devotion to God
Messianic Expectation
Party Divisions (Pharisees, Sadcees, …)
Sadducees:
Party of Priest (include High Priest, leader of Sandherin, political and religious ruling council of Israel)
Focus: temple sacrifice
Pharisees
Part of scribes, copied Scriptures
Became expert on content and interpretation, became teachers (rabbi)
Focus: Scripture, Law
Herodians
NT mentions but no detail, may be same group as Essenes
Josephus does not mention them
Essenes
Mentioned by Josephus (early Jewish historian),  but not in NT, favoured by Herod. 
Zealots
Zealous for the independence of Jews from Roman rule
Carried out terrorist attacks, which led to full out war, which led to destruction of Jerusalem and temple
Impactful but did not last

Distinctives: Who survived? How powerful or impactful?
No temple → no sacrifice → no Sadducees
Herod dies → no Herodians
Pharisees survived → Rabbis → Rabbinic Judaism

Biblical to Rabbinic Judaism

Core Beliefs and Practices
Shema: critical connection between Biblical and Rabbinic Judaism.
Confession statement
Relationship with God and people

LORD: personal name (unlike Allah) of God, to holy to write
Tetragrammaton is YHWH
Allah came after but not personal
Unspeakable name of God
Translated as Jehovah or Yahweh

v.8 “Tie them…on your hands… bind them on your foreheads”
Tefillin: small boxes on forehead with key passages of Scripture, leather straps wrap around R. arms worn by Jewish men.
Only worn during prayer services. 

v.9 “write them on the doorframe”
Mezuzah: small rectangular box placed on doorframe of Jewish dwellings diagonally.
Contains handwritten scroll
Shema on one side of the scroll
Other side: “Shaddai” = the Almighty
Ritual when affixing
R. doorpost going in
Lots of specific instructions. 

Mitzvahs (Commandments):
Shema gives Mitzvahs
10 commandments are mitzvah
Bar/Bat mitzvah: son/daughter of the commandment

Judaism pray 3x a day since Babylon captivity

Modern Day Jewish Groups
Hasidic → Orthodox (23%, oldest & keep all tradition) → Conservative (47%, came last) → Reform (30%, liberal. 2nd oldest)

Orthodox
Very strict adherence to the law.
Men and women sit separately.
Only male rabbis.
Absolutely no work on Sabbath.

Hasidim (Hasidic Jews)
1700s
Black hat and coat, had to do with fashion trends during the same time
‘Folk religion’
This is why they are referred to as UltraOrthodox, ‘stick to something and don’t budge’

Reform Judaism
Developed in 18th century
Accepted W. European culture and intellectual practice. 
Worship in local language and not Hebrew.
Dia (2) spora (seed): diaspora is the dispersion/ spreading of people into different region, 2nd seeding
Men and women sit together
Socially liberal
Call their synagogues temples (others say temple only if animal sacrifice is done)
Talmud not binding on Jews
Religions practice should be constantly evolving (accepting cultural practices)
Not waiting for a Messiah.
Had female and African American Rabbi.

Conservative Jews
19th century
Developed in Germany
Tries to bridge cultural adoption of Reform and tradition-adherence of Orthodox.
Keeps Kosher but adapts to the larger culture in dress and values.
Men and women sit together in services.
Services are in local language.
More adherence to Tanakh.

Other Jewish Groups
Diaspora: 2nd seeding
Jews travel as far as they can to find a better life, avoid persecution (2nd seeding wherever they go)
Jews come back to Jerusalem for big festivals.
Falasha Jews of Ethiopia (thought they were last Jews because they were so remote)
Chinese Jews of Kaifeng
Tradition Judaism: synagogue officially needs 10 men, but what about remote areas…

Everyday Judaism: Dress and Diet
Usually applies to men, varies depending on group, different for daily life and synagogue. 

Leviticus: “Do not cut hair or sides of your head or clip off edges of beard.”

Yarmulke/Kippa:
Yarmulke: Yiddish (Hebrew and Polish combined), means in awe of God
Kippa: dome in Hebrew
Dome cap worn on head.
Wear because:
Remind that God is above man
Reminder to live as ambassador of Torah
Identify with Jewish people (unity).
2 ideas of God being ‘above’:
In Talmud, because God is so great, when we walk, we should bow every 6 ft. 
God is above, so cover head. 

Prayer Shawl/ Tallit
Worn by Jewish men during prayer service in synagogue
613 fringes, which represent 613 mitzvahs.
Tzitzit: fringes of prayer shawl.

Jewish Symbols in Jewelry
Star of David
Folk aspect, not from Biblical times
17th century
12 vertices = 12 tribes of Israel or 2 overlapping triangles = 1 heaven, 1 heart, living w/ both in mind
Chai: means life
Made of 2 Hebrew letters, sum is 18 (gematria) = value of life
Give charity in multiple of 18. 

The Laws of Kashrut (Kosher)
Kosher: fit
Parve: neutral (eg. veggies)
Treyfe: non-kosher

Dietary Observances: laws of Kashrut
Content and preparation

Reasons to keep Kosher:
Matter of life/death (cannot be put together)
Don’t boil kid (goat) in mother’s milk (mixing life and death)
Don’t cook meat with milk
Matter of health, pigs were dirty
Because God said so

Sources of Kashrut:
Biblical, Leviticus and Deut. tell what can/not be eaten.
Talmud provides interpretation of how Biblical restrictions should be applied
Later, Rabbinic teaching expand on Talmud (If in doubt, don’t do it to risk not breaking God’s command)

Kosher 1: Categories
Land animal: cloven hoof (grooves), chews the cud (ruminate) - kosher
If only has 1/none, then treyfe
Sea animals: any that have fins and scale - kosher 
No crustacean and shrimp
Air animals/ birds: no general rule
Chicken, turkey, duck, gees, pheasant, quail, partridge - kosher
Scavenger: Seagull, vulture, owl, eagle, raven - treyfe
Reptiles, rodents, insects (almost all), forbidden. 

Kosher 2: Preparation
Ritually slaughtered, no roadkill
Clean stroke to the animal’s neck when killed
All blood drained out

Kosher 3: Separation of Meat and Dairy
3 separate occasions, not supposed to boil kid in mother’s milk.
Rabbis extended this principle to not allow meat and dairy mixed in same meal
Some groups separate dairy and meat plates
Some separate appliances and utensils/pots and pans. 

Shabbat (Observe, Remember)
Keeping Sabbath
Not doing work on Sabbath
25 hr observance: just before sundown Friday to nightfall Saturday
God ceased work on 7th day of Creation
39 types of work forbidden in Mishnah
Home/ Family: candles, winde, hand wash, challah bread, followed by feast

Shabbat Service
Several different synagogue services (minyan: minimum 10 men)
Read from Torah and Prophets (annual cycle)
Prayer, Blessing, Service


Jewish Holidays
High Holidays: Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur. 

Rosh Hashanah (Day of Judgement):
Means Head of the Year
Jewish New Year
Awareness of living under God
Focused on reflection, how to grow, areas that need forgiveness 
Teshuvah: spiritual realignment (repent and return to God)
Tefillah: connecting through prayer (Abraham/Sarah/Isaac story read)
Tzedakah: justice
It is mitzvah to hear the shofar blown (to awaken yourself)
Apples dipped in honey = sweet new year
Shana Tova: “Have a good year”
Tashlich: daytime ritual where bread crumb thrown into water = cast away bad habits. 

Yom Kippur (Day of Atonement):
Holiest day
Prepare by asking for forgiveness 
Afflict your soul by fasting, bathing, no perfume… and commit to change behavior.
Kol Nidre: service that starts in the beginning of YK, public apology of failing and shortcomings. Wear a shawl. 
Prayer services after (day starts evening, then morning, then afternoon).
Pray confession and to change ways (read from Jonah and Leviticus)
Yizkor: memorial service
Reconcile relationships because of reconciliation with God(as you have been forgiven, forgive other)
Repent and turn to God.
Then eat. 

Sukkot (Festival of Booths/ Booths):
Dwell in the booth for a week. 
5 days after YK. 
Connect to ancestors living in the desert (mobile/tabernacle etc…)
Remember God’s provision in the desert because festival is during harvest time. 
Schach: plant matter on top of the booth (roof). Should be sparse enough to see stars and let rain in but provide shade. 
God pours out light. We can’t look directly at it but can see God ‘through the shade’ by seeing his kindness and love in the world. 
Etrog: fruit. Lulav: leaves bound together. Mitzvah to wave both of these things around. 
Service and food. 

Simchat Torah (Joy of the Torah):
Day after the Sukkot.
Read last torah portion of the year (Moses/Deut.) and then roll scroll back. 
Marks end of reading cycle. 
Genesis read next sabbath. 
There is power in God’s word, and we know God better when we read His word. 

Hanukkah/ Chanukah (dedication)
Holiday of Lights
Gift giving
Maccabees (part of Apocrypha) is source
8 days
Story 1: Maccabees rebelled against Greeks, rising to occasion
Story 2: Oil miraculously lasts 8 days, longer than expected = people outdoing themselves
Light menorah (8 branches + 1 middle = 8 days), temple has 7
Eat oily food, Rosh Hashanah eat sweet food
Latkes: deep fried potato
Sufganiyot: donut with jelly filling
Publicize miracles of holiday
God can help you do more than you think (like how light lasted longer)

Purim (lots)
Jewish Halloween because of dress up.
Story of Esther, commemorates victory of Jews over Persia/Haman.
Interestingly, God not mentioned in this story.
Megillah: scroll that tells story of Esther
Commanded not to forget, boo at Haman
Mitzvah: hear entire Megillah
Public bravery (Mordecai, Esther)
Hamantaschen: triangle-shaped cookers
Aka Oznei Haman
3 sides either represent, Haman’s hat, ears, or forefathers.
Drink: till cannot determine ‘Blessed is Mordecai’ and ‘Cursed is Haman’
Mitzvah: make gifts of money to at least 2 need people. 

Passover (Pesach)
Passover seder (dinner with order of service). Seder (order).
Cup of wine for Elijah
Matzvah: unleavened bread
Seder plate
Shank bone: sacrifice
Egg: festival offering
Bitter herb: suffering
Charoset (sweet mixed of rect. apples): bricks
Karpas: tears (dipped in salt water)
Piece of lettuce: bitterness
Haggadah: book to guide you through seder.
To commemorate Exodus. 
Other parts
Bless wine
Wash hands
Dip vegetable in salt water
Break the middle matzah
Maggid: tell the passover story, how to remember Exodus
Younges asks 4 questions: What’s different about thought?
Open door for Elijah at the end

Shavuot (Festival of Weeks)
Celebrates when 10 commandments are given (God’s Word coming down to his people, God giving Torah to ppl.)
7 weeks after Passover
Biblical in Deuteronomy
Offer firstfruits of wheat harvest. 
All night study sessions because thankful God gave Word (less formal).

Rites of Passage

1. Birth:
Baby naming after relatives
Names considered powerful, have the essence of person, name after who you want your child to grow up to be like
Ceremony at 8 days old

Brit Milah (Covenant of Circumcision):
Boys
Circumcision done by mohel (professional)
Baby naming
Parents talk about how they want to raise the child
Write a letter to the child
Meal 

Brit Bat (Daughter’s Covenant):
Girls
No specific requirements
Wrap in tallis or maybe wash child’s feet
Baby naming
Write letter to child
Meal

Gomel: 
Prayer of thanksgiving you say after a dangerous event (like giving birth)
Blessing for new moms, gratitude for moms for hardship of labour

2. Puberty:

Bat (girls) and Bar (boys) Mitzvah: (Son/Daughter of the Commandment)
Boys (13), girls (12), responsible for themselves (b4 parents responsible for behaviour)
Read passage of Scripture in Hebrew, Rabbi teach kids, and they use yod
Boys read directly from Torah, girls maybe Esther
Boys wear tallit/kippah
Throw candy at kids = showered with blessings

3. Weddings:
Engagement (taken more seriously) to prepare for marriage and plan family
L’chaim: toast to life
Smash a plate together = permanent, no going back
Stomp on glass
Maybe was when guests were rowdy, Rabbi broke glass (Halmud)
Symbolizes destruction of temple (smth. unexpected can happen, live to the fullest)
Soulmates: when born, half a glass and now met other part that fits perfectly
Ritual bath
Not see each other for a bit b4 marriage
Ketubah: marriage contract spell out duties of husband and wife
Exchange rings + 7 blessings
Chuppah: Jewish wedding canopy, special spiritual area
Under chuppah: symbolic act of intimacy, but open to all 4 sides = other friends/family support
Divorce: get a Get (divorce document)
Man gives woman permission to be with whoever she wants
Difference groups have some differences (reform might not need get)
Rabbit + 2 witnesses

4. Death:
Structured process, stages for mourning
1. Aninut: before the funeral, tear piece of clothing (kriah) tearing hole in fabric of normal life
Burial society takes care of body
2. Funeral: happens asap, community takes care of you.
3. Shiva: first week after burial, intense mourning period at home (immediate family), reflection
4. Shloshim: 30 days after, family goes out of house, maybe party/new clothe/shave
5. Aveilut: first year, recite prayer (kaddish), for children of deceased
6. Unveiling: tombstone placed
7. Yizkor: communal remembrance service to remember all deceased, 4x a year, peoples name on plague
8. Yahrzeit: candle light on death anniversary

Funeral
Levaya: accompanying
Men expected to cover head (kippur), even non-Jews
Open casket = disrespectful
No flowers, bc. flowers = life, don’t mix life and death
Talk to family after funeral
Casker brought out to grave, ppl. follow
Each person shovels/ throws dirt in the grave. Stick shovel back in dirt (not hand to next person) because it is an individual obligation (mitzvah)
“May God comfort you”
Leaving cemetery: wash hands w/o drying them, leaving the place of death and reentering the world of living. 
Then, Shiva.

Shiva
Stay in home and reflect on the person who died, pray, grieve
Visitors, don’t have to ask to come (mitzvah)
Community provides meals and comfort
Cover mirrors, tear clothes, uncut fruit, burn 7 day candle
Make donation to charitable organization important to deceased or you in deceased name


