Valiquette v. Tim Hortons 
Jovi Lee

Right knee and right shoulder pain and injury. Tim Hortons did not try to accommodate disability. Contract terminated. Discrimination due to disability? 

Employer is required to accommodate an employee's disability up to point of undue hardship. 

Applicant has protected characteristic. Applicants experienced adverse treatment’ being fired affected livelihood. Protected characteristic was a factor in the adverse treatment. 

Was termination solely because of inability to do duties. 

Overaccommadated due to perception/assumption.

The respondent lacks a procedural and substantive component to the withdrawal of tasks. The respondent did discriminate on the grounds of disability.  

She was compensated (20k for injury to dignity and 15k for lost wages and prejudgment interest)

Youth Bowling v. McLeod
Wendy Liao

Tammy McLeod has Cerebral palsy, causing her to be unable to perform certain tasks. Tammy had met the requirements to participate in a bowling competition, but was disqualified because she was unable to bowl manually, but needed the aid of a ramp. 

I think her disqualification was reasonable because she was incapable of performing an essential aspect of bowling. I do think that manual control is the essence of bowling, but I also do believe that there is some manual control by manually grasping the bowling ball on a certain part of the ramp and then letting go. Though Tammy does not place the ball on the ramp, she is the last person to touch the ball and thus determine the direction of the ball. There are many different manual ways that someone can roll a bowling ball, and I think that Tammy’s method is just on the far side of a spectrum. 

I was confused at first why the court determined that she could not perform an essential task (manual control) of the sport but still allowed her to play. Although I find that the Youth Bowling made a reasonable decision, I think that the court’s decision was ultimately correct. Tammy loved bowling. The morals

I think that in allowing Tammy, there is a positive and caring aspect of the court that is displayed. It shows that the court has morals. Ultimately, no one is being harmed. Even if someone were unable to make it to the next round, I think that the benefit of allowing Tammy to pursue one of the activities she can enjoy and participate in, outweighs the possible harms of someone who is able to participate in many different activities. 

So, is the only reason they are allowing Tammy to play is because she is not good at bowling? I think so. If she was

Tammy McLeod has Cerebral palsy, bowls with aid of ramp. Blood vessels tense. PHysically unable to do certain tasks. 

Tammy disqualified from bowling competition because the rule said that the bowling ball must be bowled by manual means. OHRC held Tammy had been denied equally treatment, and allowed use of assisted devices and pay Tammy $2000. Bowling council said no and appealed. 

Was T protected by OHRC? Organizing bowling tournament is a service. Applies. 

Discrim? Moore Test: protected characteristic (cerebral palsy). Adverse impact: rule of manual control excludes those with who have lost use of hand and arm. 

Was her disqualification may be justifiable bc she incapable of performing an essential aspect of bowling. s17(1) of OHRC permits the exclusion they essentially incapable doing. Is manual control the essence? Tamil: use of ball to knock down pins. Court: manual control determine direction velocity, and spin (manual control). Concluded that Tammy does not exercise manual control over the bowl, so she cannot bowl. 


Did council accommodate Tammy up to the point of undue hardship? Tammy is not given an advantage in bowling over the other participants. There is no alteration for bowling in the other competitors. Potential on fairness being a factor is minuscule as Tammy was always welcomed in the community of bowling in the past. Therefore, appeal is dismissed. 
Theres not hardship, so its ok. Not like soccer, where everyone else would have to adjust. 

How did the court say that she cannot do essential part but still need to accommodate her? What is the point of determining what the essence of bowling is?

Can exclude someone who is essentially incapable of performing an activity. Like no legs to play soccer vs no hands. Because having her play does not impose an undue hardship onto others. 

OTCC v. Ontario
Judy Zhang

2019- math test established
2021- MTP data submitted
Dec 2021- Applicants won trial at divisional won (Ontario lost). 
2023 - court of appeal; appellants won (MTP kep/Ontario wont)

2021 data 1st admin: 70% black and indigenous, white 90%. Overall passing rate 92%
2nd data: overall passing rate 98%. 97 whit, 92 racialized. 

MPT: computer math test for all teachers who finish bachelor Ed. All teachers are required to take bc they may teach gr6 math. Allowed to retake as many times. Teachers of Native Languages exempt. 

Out of all student: 26% racialized. Teachers 13%. 

Discourage multilingual candidates? Mr. Nyeland. 

Dr. Reid: negative impact on diversification on minorities. 

Analysis: 
Does the Law applies? MPT is official requirement established by Ontario gov. Applies

Disproportionate adverse impact? Divisional court said: 1. significantly lower pass rates of black candidates vs. white candidates. Why no asians in the data? 2. Also said blacks and indigenous students are historically disadvantaged due to residential school system. 3. Cited dr. reid 4.retaking test imposes hardship, which causes hardship. 5. Unfairness of MPT because candidates that would be otherwise more than qualified in terms of other abilities. Therefore, disproportionate adverse impact. 
Court of appeal: no because 1. Not enough data back then. 2. Difficulty of rewriting test has no evidence of adverse impact. 3. Comparable test results. 

Is there discrimination? Divisional:fewer entries to profession and negatively impacts the diversity of the teaching population. Court of Appeal: it is fair; all the questions are screened for bias. 

Exception: divisional: impair and balance failed. 

Conclusion: respondent shall pay applicants 90000 in cost of the application. Appellants did not seek court in appeal. 

I