Theodore Chiu
Mr. West
ENG4U
October 5, 2024
My Old New Castle Response Questions
Response
I think the author’s purpose in writing this essay was to highlight the change in Newcastle. As a child, all his senses were adept to his surroundings, especially the changing of the seasons. Now, Richards does not describe the beauty of nature, but notices how franchises and technology have removed parts of nature. His home has changed.Malls have replaced fields, and there is no frozen-over river because of the new technology of icebreakers. He feels his home has changed so much. So much of it is missing. The things he enjoyed in his childhood – like the theatre – are no longer there. Richard ends with, “Neither bad nor good,  I suppose–but away from what it was” (297). 
I believe this type of imagery is so evocative and effective because it immerses the reader. It does not only cause the reader to imagine a certain scenery, but it enhances this image by making the reader imagine or even recall similar senses and tastes. It is a beautiful mix of imagination and recollection. Perhaps, the reader has never been to the ocean, but they know the taste of salt. So, when a writer describes the ocean, tasting like salt, the reader can use his imagination and recollection to form a similar setting to which the author is describing. It fully immerses the reader, so they believe they are in the story. Some of the senses:
Sound: “All night the train rumbled…To this day I find the sound of trains more comforting than lonesome” (Richards 296). 
Touch: “...the schools we sat in too warm…” (296).
Scent: “Spring came with the smell of mud and grass burning in the fields above us” (296). 
Sight and Taste:“Adolescent blueberry crops and sunken barns dotted the fields near the bay, where the air had the taste of salt and tar…” (296).
Perhaps, all the author remembers of the Miramichi is that it “is a great working river.” Or perhaps the author wants the reader to imagine what a great working river looks like. It embodies the ‘asides’ of a child, as Richards is recalling his childhood. 
Newcastle is where Richards grew up. It is his home. It is ‘old’ to him. However, now that he returns, he notices all the changes in his town. It has changed so much. It is now new to him. 
The essay ends in the author’s present time, his adulthood. The structure begins with his childhood memories of Newcastle for the majority of the text, before the last two paragraphs end somewhat abruptly with the many changes the town has gone through. Richards immerses the reader into his childhood town with many sensory descriptions and imagery, but ‘cuts’ this dreamy feeling in at the end of his essay. I think it portrays the author’s feelings perfectly. I think it portrays how the author returned to his hometown, only to come to an abrupt stop, as his immersion of childhood memories comes to a complete halt. 
I cannot think of any movies that fairly depict my life. The only thing I can think of is Challengers because I wanted to be a tennis player. On the contrary, I think shows like Glee and the teen rom-com  are not like my life. These shows and movies depict lots of bullying and partying, which is something that I have not really been around as I have attended Christian schools most of my life. 
“My Old Newcastle” is connected with Fahrenheit 451 in many ways. The first connection is between Clarisse and Richard’s memories of Newcastle as a child. They both notice an array of the nature and workings around them. The society Montag lives in is similar to the change Richards sees as an adult in Newcastle. Like how fast media has taken over Montag’s society, causing people to no longer notice the peace and beauty of the environment around them, Richards notices how nature has been overtaken. The over-frozen lakes of winter are no longer. The seasons have been disturbed. The fields are no more; they have been replaced with malls. For Richards, he does not necessarily state that the changes are harmful or dangerous, but the change creates a large sense of unfamiliarity, leading to a sense of uncomfortability. Second, the removal of the theatre is connected to the parlour walls. People no longer go as a ‘community’ to the theatres, but everyone is ‘stuck’ in their own homes at the parlour walls. In Fahrenheit 451, people have forgotten about the history. Similarly, it seems as though only RIchards notices the changes in his hometown and remembers the past. 
