Poster:
Portrait, ancient top and medieval bottom half, scroll drawn on bristol board

Ancient:
Major Ideas: 
Democracy, philosophy, logic, reasoning, 
https://www.ushistory.org/civ/5.asp#:~:text=One%20prominent%20element%20of%20Greek,philosophy%2C%20mathematics%2C%20and%20science. 
Cultural Phenomena:
Sculptures, olympics, architecture, mythology
Themes:
https://www.litcharts.com/lit/mythology/themes 
Fate. The power of fate hangs over the lives of all the characters Hamilton describes, and even controls the gods themselves. ...
Pride and Hubris. The greatest sin in many myths is when a mortal grows too proud and claims to be the equal or superior of the gods. ...
Heroism. ...
Justice and Vengeance. ...
Beauty.
Tech:https://thatmuse.com/2020/05/29/ancient-greek-technology/
https://www.smith.edu/hsc/museum/ancient_inventions/hsc14b.htm
Engineering inventions
Odometer
Watermill
Astrolabe
water clock
Archimedes' Screw 
Cultural inventions
Human Sculpture
Democracy
Jury System
Olympic Games
Philosophy
Astronomy
Theatre
Food: 
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/729090627179801133/ 
Bread dipped in wine
Olives
Grapes & Figs
Salted fish
Cheese
Honey
Fashion:
Himation (underneath layer that goes to waist), tunic (larger fabric on top that drapes to legs)
Understanding of Childhood: https://womeninantiquity.wordpress.com/2020/12/01/children-and-childhood-in-ancient-greece/
Having children was really important for Ancient Greeks. Therefore, women participated in rituals that were supposed to help them with their fertility and ability to bear children.
Children were very important 
economy was mainly formed around agriculture
more children meant having more helpers with the work
Bonds with parents became very strong
Many literature and works depicted the strong connection between the parents and their children. (Homer’s Iliad)
Many rituals, parents can choose if they want to accept the new born or abandon them
Childhood
Boys and girls grew up together until the age of 7, playing the same time of games and residing in the women quarters (gynaeceum) of the household together with their mother. They used the same toys to play, more interesting of which were alive beetles they would tie at one end of a string and run while holding the other end. 
boys and girls lived together and were more often looked like playful children than gendered members of society. In artistic depictions
Growing up
Once they became of age seven, separation between the genders was seen and they no longer played together. 
Started to integrate children into functioning societal members
Historical Events: 
https://www.ducksters.com/geography/country/greece_history_timeline.php 
The Persian Wars
The Peloponnesian War
The campaigns of Alexander the Great
The Punic Wars
The conquest of Gaul
The Roman Revolution
The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire

Medieval:
Dark Ages: 476 - 1066 
High Medieval: 1066-1473
Major Ideas: The Crusades, The 4 Humours (Sanguine, Chloeric, Melancholic, Phlegmatic), Artemidorus’ 5 Types of Dreams (somnium: shows truth veiled in allegory, visio, orculum, insomnium, visum), Daimon (the core of your spiritual idenity which makes you unique)
https://www.britannica.com/topic/feudalism/Development-in-the-19th-and-20th-centuries
Cultural Phenomena:  Gnosticism, Glory (kleos), Courtly Love (powerful woman and lowly man), Crusades, Monastic Lifestyle (eremitic and coenobitical, and stylisitic)
Themes: Justice (from ordeals, such as taking an object out of boiling water, and Holmgangs, duel on an island to determine guilt → Justinian Code 1275), Vengeance (N. Europe, when someone wrongs you, your lord, or family, you must take revenge in blood payment)
Tech: Motte and Bailey Castle → Medieval Castles, Trebuchet, Cathedrals with flying buttresses (Romanesque vs. Gothic), Printing press (15 century, Information distribution, No longer just the church/state, Helped lead to the Protestant Revolution), Heavy Plow (9th century, revolutionized farming)


Food: Eucharist (bread and wine, which were also major components of regular meals), religious passover; the Sabbath was commemorated by eating the bread and drinking wine (symbolizing the body and blood of Jesus Christ)
https://sites.owu.edu/trident/2021/03/01/medieval-food-less-sugar-some-spice-but-generally-nice/
Fashion: Bright colours and rich decorations among the wealthy. Expensive clothing based off material and cut, not design. Some trends included laces, pointed shoes, shorter tunics for men. Clothing was usually made of wool. Other decorative items included fur (fox, rabbit, beaver, ermine) trimmings, tassels, fringes, and embroidery. Popular colours included crimson, blue, yellow, green, and purple. 
https://www.worldhistory.org/article/1248/clothes-in-medieval-england/

Understanding of Childhood: Because of St. Augustine’s idea of original sin, how people are born with sin, religious figures started religious education. Thomas Aquinas: believe in moral education. Because of these two figures, there begins to be a focus on educating at an early age to lead people away from sin and into redemption. This affects the start of a split between age groups because before the Middle Ages, children were seen as mini adults (Mrs. Choi). 
In Medieval England, childhood ranged from the birth of a child up until they were 12. After that point, they were considered responsible for their actions. 

Historical Events: Fall of Rome (start of Middle Ages in 476 AD), Tudor Dynasty Takes Over/ Gutenberg’s Printing Press (end of Middle Ages in 1476 AD). Other: Battle of Hastings in 1066 (marks the last fully Germanic culture), The Crusades, Black Plague (1347-1351)



Socrates: socratic method, innate knowledge, moral development (the earlier the better)
Founder of Western philosophy. 
(469—399 B.C.E.)
https://iep.utm.edu/socrates/#:~:text=i.-,Birth%20and%20Early%20Life,of%20noble%20birth%20like%20Plato.

Cultural Phenomena:
Themes of the time: In a culture that worshiped male beauty, Socrates had the misfortune of being born incredibly ugly

Technologies: The bolts and nuts, gears and rules, pulleys and belts, sprockets and chains, block and tackles and winches, hydraulic controllers and valves are just some of the inventions of the ancient Greeks which were the foundations of their complex technology.
https://kotsanas.com/en/the-museum/#:~:text=The%20bolts%20and%20nuts%2C%20gears,foundations%20of%20their%20complex%20technology.
Food:
Fashion: 
Understanding of Childhood:https://www.worldhistory.org/socrates/#:~:text=Early%20Life%20and%20Career,father's%20profession%20as%20a%20sculptor.
He studied music, gymnastics, and grammar in his youth (the common subjects of study for a young Greek) and followed his father's profession as a sculptor.

Historical Events:
Socrates fought valiantly during his time in the Athenian military.  Just before the Peloponnesian War with Sparta began in 431 B.C.E, he helped the Athenians win the battle of Potidaea (432 B.C.E.), after which he saved the life of Alcibiades, the famous Athenian general.
He was the inspiration for Plato
He is best known for his association with the Socratic method of question and answer, his claim that he was ignorant (or aware of his own absence of knowledge)
Socrates was married to Xanthippe, bearing his first son Lamprocles and possibly had a second wife bearing his two other children, Sophroniscus and Menexenus
He also was possibly gay: In accordance with Athenian custom, Socrates was open about his physical attraction to young men, though he always subordinated his physical desire for them to his desire that they improve the condition of their souls.


Plato: 

General knowledge:
Plato was an Athenian philosopher who lived during (428-347 B.C.) during Ancient Greece. He was a follower and student of Socrates, who is credited as the father of western philosophy. He considered being a politician until Socrates died in 399 B.C. His real name was Aristocles but it is speculated that Plato was a nickname given to him by his grandfather or wrestling coach because of his broad build or his broad forehead. (Platon in Greek means broad or wide) Plato was considered an idealist because he believed in a perfect and ideal world.

Major Ideas:
The dualism of reality and humans. Phenomena, which is the reality we experience, is an imperfect reflection of the perfect ideal world called “world of forms”. This is a world where everything is in its most perfect form or idea. The world of forms can be interpreted as a society where everyone is fully educated and enlightened to the point where we have created a perfect utopia. Plato believed in the nurturing of our body and mind because he viewed humans to be dual in nature as well. 
The human’s soul is a ‘tripartite’ meaning there are three parts. 
The rational part which is logical and makes decisions based on one’s best interest
The spirited part which controls emotions and where one’s sense of honor
The appetitive part which seeks basic needs and constantly craves satisfaction
Plato heavily valued and emphasized the importance of knowledge and education.
Plato’s popular work, Republic, is a collection of dialogues which reflect his political and ethical views. One of his most popular ideas is the Allegory of the Cave which highlights how information directly shapes our world. 
People are chained in a cave since childhood facing a wall. There is a fire behind them and people walk by holding objects which cast shadows on the wall. All the information about the world comes from the shadows that the cave dwellers see. This comes to the point where they believe that the shadows are real people. One person escapes and sees the outside world and how there is much more to life than the things in the cave. He comes back to tell the cave dwellers but they think he is stupid and crazy and kill him. This reflects how crucial information is and how it can impact a person’s whole view of reality.
387 B.C., returned to Athens and founded a philosophical school in Greek hero Academus. He lectured others on philosophy. The school continued to thrive 3 centuries after he died. This showed that he valued education and information. 
Education nurtures virtue and justice. The key virtues needed are wisdom, courage, moderation, and justice. Moral education is needed to balance your soul. 
He advocated for women’s right to education. He believed that one’s educational potential and role in society should be measured by their ability not their gender. 
“The teacher must seek to direct his students’ souls by persuading them to direct themselves towards what is best in life.” - Plato

Impacts on Children’s literature/film:
Plato’s Allegory of the Cave has been a popular inspiration for various dystopian works such as  The Matrix by the Wachowskis and Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury.
Educational content can be derived partly from Plato’s emphasis on the cruciality of learning in relation to the development of a child’s virtues and justice.

Impacts on the concept of childhood:
Children are the responsibility of the community, to take care of them and educate them.
Heavy emphasis on the importance of childhood.
Education helps children, people, and society to learn their virtues and justice.
Believed in a general curriculum for kids to learn
Music, physical training, and poetry for young children to train their spirit and body
Arithmetic geometry, math, and science at age ten to learn abstract thinking and reasoning
Philosophy and dialectics for more promising individuals at age 20


A&E Television Networks. (n.d.). Plato ‑ life, Philosophy & Quotes. History.com.  https://www.history.com/topics/ancient-greece/plato
Brandon Gonzales. (2022, September 12). 10 things you might not know about plato. Simply Charly. https://simplycharly.com/facts/10-things-you-might-not-know-about-plato
Encyclopædia Britannica, inc. (2024a, August 16). The republic. Encyclopædia Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/topic/The-Republic
What does Plato Say About Education in the republic?. WisdomShort.com. (n.d.).   https://wisdomshort.com/philosophers/plato/on-education-in-the-republic 
Aristotle: 
Sources: 
Kenny, A. J., & Amadio, A. H. (2024, September 10). Aristotle | Biography, Works, Quotes, Philosophy, Ethics, & Facts. Encyclopedia Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/biography/Aristotle 
Aristotle’s Conception of Childhood - 213 words | Bartleby. (n.d.). https://www.bartleby.com/essay/Aristotles-Conception-Of-Childhood-8B1DFD00AAB01817 
Philosophy, D. (2021, April 11). Timeline: The Life of Aristotle. Daily Philosophy. https://daily-philosophy.com/timeline-the-life-of-aristotle/ 
Mark, J. J., & Cartwright, M. (2024). Ancient Greek clothing. World History Encyclopedia. https://www.worldhistory.org/article/20/ancient-greek-clothing/ 
Riis, S. (2013). The ultimate technology: the end of technology and the task of nature. Artificial Life, 19(3_4), 471–485. https://doi.org/10.1162/artl_a_00119 
Aristotle | Discoveries, Facts & Life - Lesson | Study.com. (n.d.). study.com. https://study.com/academy/lesson/who-was-aristotle-definition-philosophy-quiz.html 

Main ideas:
Life: Aristotle was a student of Plato and later founded his own school, the Lyceum.
Philosophy: Aristotle emphasized empirical observation and logical reasoning. His ideas on ethics, particularly in "Nicomachean Ethics", focus on developing virtues from a young age, relevant to childhood education.
Literature: His "Poetics" is foundational in literary theory, influencing how stories, including children’s literature, are structured. (Kenny & Amadio, 2024)
Cultural Phenomena: 
Invented the field of formal logic (Kenny & Amadio, 2024)
Themes: 
Happiness, the voluntary and choice, the doctrine of the mean, particular virtues of character and temperamental means, virtues of thought, akrasia, pleasure, friendship, and luck. (Aristotle’s Ethics | Ethics, 2022)
Technologies:
Aristotle maintains that technology not only imitates nature; it is also capable of creating what nature cannot bring-forth on its own. (Riis, 2013)
Inventing the scientific method of analysis (Aristotle | Discoveries, Facts & Life - Lesson | Study.com, n.d.)
Food:

Fashion:
Toga or Chiton many in color beige 
Sometimes with a rope around the waist (Mark & Cartwright, 2024)
Understanding of Childhood:
According to Aristotle's Conception of childhood, children are “tiny, immature, humans.” Aristotle believed they had the potential to become a mature specimen of a human. He thought that with the normal guidance of an adult and the correct biological and psychological structures, the child would mature (Lewin, 1963).
Historical Events:
384 Born in Stagira
367-347 Aristotle moves to Athens and stays at Plato’s Academy for 20 years
349-348 Philipp of Macedonia starts subjugating Greek states. Resentment of Athenians against Macedonia.
347 To Hermias in Atarneus, Hellespont, Asia Minor
345/344 Aristotle and Theophrastus travel to Lesbos. Aristotle marries Pythias, Hermias’ daughter
343-342 Recall of Aristotle to Macedonia, educating Alexander. 341 Death of Hermias, possibly betrayed by Philip of Macedonia
335-334 Aristotle returns to Athens, possibly intercedes with Alexander on behalf of the Athenians, but is never liked by the Athenians.
323 Aristotle withdraws from Athens to Chalkis. 322 Aristotle dies in Chalkis, Euboea (Philosophy, 2021)



St. Augustine (350 AD-430 AD): 
https://www.britannica.com/biography/Saint-Augustine
Born in Tagaste (Roman community), Africa. 
Respectable parents → acquire first-class education. 
Studied then taught rhetoric in Carthage, then rhetoric at Milan, then back to Carthage, eventually at the church.
Writings and sermons of high theological level but still heavy impact to the common, less-educated person. 
Made a presbyter (roughly a priest) at Hippo in 391. 
Was part of Manichaean cult in teenage years, but later wrote against this belief that God was good but not omnipotent to prevent evil. 
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/augustine/

“While gratuitous election is, apart from being consoling, comparatively easily squared with the axioms of divine benevolence, justice and omnipotence, its corollary, the equally gratuitous reprobation and damnation of Esau, is a serious philosophical problem (ib. 1.2.8). If it is not to violate the principle of God’s justice, it obliges us to assume some kind of evil in Esau, which is however excluded by Paul’s explicit statement to the contrary (Romans 9:11). Augustine’s solution is his doctrine of original sin. Both Jacob and Esau have inherited Adam’s guilt that his sin has spread over all humankind—a debt that God remits for Jacob but exacts from Esau for reasons that, Augustine admits, necessarily elude human understanding but are certainly just. Since the Fall, humankind is nothing but a “lump of sin” that God might justly have damned as a whole but from which he has chosen to save some individuals and to transform them into “vessels of mercy” (ib. 1.2.16, cf. Romans 9:23).”

Major Ideas: 
Original sin, inherent evil, and religious education (born with sin and therefore, need religious teaching to turn from sin and to redemption). (Mrs. Choi, Sept. 19, 2024)
Practice of Biblical exegesis. 
Written works: Confessions, On Christian Doctrine, etc..

Cultural Phenomena:
Themes:
Technologies:
Food:
Fashion:
Understanding of Childhood:
Historical Events:
Impact on Children’s Lit/Film: Beginning to focus education with morals, which would likely develop into literature. 

Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274)
https://aleteia.org/2024/04/11/aquinas-and-the-timeless-art-of-raising-virtuous-children
https://dsc.duq.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2330&context=etd
https://interestingengineering.com/lists/18-inventions-of-the-middle-ages-that-changed-the-world
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1200%E2%80%931300_in_European_fashion

For Images:
https://www.ancient-origins.net/history-famous-people/thomas-aquinas-0020341
https://licentiapoetica.com/introduction-to-thomas-aquinas-3aa0e6bc74e5

Major Ideas: 
Development of reason
Moral education
Explaining why children should have good behaviour
Rather than punishment, mistakes are opportunities for growth
Help children understand why they are wrong and what to do better
Role of parents and society
Children watch parents/adults closely, learn from them
Good parenting = good role models

Cultural Phenomena (historical views):

Themes:
Technologies: 
Medieval
Printing press (15 century)
Information distribution
No longer just the church/state
Helped lead to the Protestant Revolution
Heavy Plow (9th century) 
Revolutionized farming
Wheelbarrows
Mining/construction
The flying Buttress
Architectural aesthetic
Enabled buildings to be built taller, more elaborate and fancy
Castles
Food: 
Bread and wine (religious passover)
Grape juice and crackers
Fruit
Grapes
Olives
Fashion: 

Understanding of Childhood: 
Influenced by Aristotle
Historical Events:
Impact on Children’s Lit/Film:


Impacts on childhood:
Focus on teaching children morals, parental responsibility for moral education
5 Facts: 

Philippe Aries 
Major ideas:

An important French medievalist, historian of the family and childhood. Worked as an archivist for the institute of Applied Research for Tropical and Subtropical fruits. Was greatly interested in the history of the family. 
Was concerned with disproving conservative claims that the 20th century family unit was declining, but that the type of family we know today was a relatively new invention. To prove his claim, he chose to study the figure at the heart of the family: the child. 
Is most well known for having published Centuries of Childhood: A Social History of Family Life in 1960, one of the most influential and controversial histories of childhood ever written. The claim he made, that the concept of childhood was not discovered until well after the middle ages, was a very divisive claim that was heavily debated by medieval scholars. 
He argued that childhood was a relatively new concept that emerged around the 17th century, concurrent with decreases in infant mortality, changes in the European education system, increasing class separation, and the family unit gradually withdrawing from the wider web of social relations.
He began focusing on the history of childhood in the late 1950s, while it was still an “almost virgin field”. Since then, the field has expanded significantly and became an established discipline, related with other areas of study such as education, social welfare, and children’s literature. 
His book was the first widely read work in childhood studies that argued childhood was a social construct. He presented evidence that modern western views of childhood were not innate or universal, but rather relatively recent developments only appearing from about the middle of the 18th century. Before this time, Aries said that childhood was viewed as an insignificant stage of life, that children (particularly infants) were not treated as family members, and those who survived were held responsible to participate in adult life at a young age. 
His controversial claims lead to much debate, especially among medieval scholars, who seeked to disprove his statement and show that parents in the medieval times did in fact have a conception of childhood. These scholars argued that medieval parents gave attention to their children, showed them affection, and emotionally invested in them. 
Aside from debate, Aries also inspired researches in the social sciences and the humanities to reexamine the idea of childhood through a different lens. With his work, he is essentially the father of the new sociology of childhood. The adherents to this new system focus on showing that children and childhood are socially constructed, and that modern western understandings of childhood have developed as a result of the historical, political, economic, social and religious circumstances of the time. 
They also aim to liberate children from the limits of the modern social constructions of childhood, and acknowledge children as beings with their own agency and roles in social life. This goal will typically involve studying varying childhoods from different countries to prove that children who don’t comply with the current western model should not be labeled as deviants or victims. 

Philippe Aries (1914-1984) was an important French medievalist and historian known for his work on family life, childhood, and the attitudes towards death in western societies. His most popular work was his book Centuries of Childhood, and in it laid his most controversial and influential claim, that the concept of childhood was not discovered until well after the medieval period, and in medieval society, the concept of childhood did not exist. He stated that childhood was not recognized or treated as a distinct phase of human life, and concluded there was much less separation between children and adults in medieval society. 
Aries had a significant impact on social and cultural history, particularly with our understanding of our views on childhood, family life, and death. He adopted an interdisciplinary approach, blending history with bits of anthropology, psychology, and sociology. His work helped lay the foundation for the study of childhood as a discipline, as well as affecting fields like cultural history, historical anthropology, and the history of mentalities. Aries can be considered the father of the new sociology of childhood. 
Today, it is accepted as common knowledge that childhood is a social construct of modern society and taken as a given that in medieval society, children were seen as “mini-adults”, with an earlier integration into adult society than today, partly due to his work. His studies in childhood also led to greater interest in examining the history and social construction of childhood, inspiring further research into it as its own field. 
Aries also published many other influential works, such as the highly acclaimed novel titled The Hour of Our Death, which shows readers a pattern of gradually developing stages of our perceptions of life and its relation to death over the last 1000 years. His original hypothesis was that there was a connection between our attitudes regarding death and our self-awareness, our degree of existence, and our individuality, but later also added more factors that contribute to our attitudes about death, those being: how society feels about nature, belief in the afterlife, and belief in the existence of evil. 


Philippe Aries | Penguin Random House Canada 
Theorists: Philippe Ariès 
Philippe Ariès - Childhood Studies - Oxford Bibliographies 
Childhood as Cognition: or Taking Philippe Ariès at his Word | Kasvatus & Aika. 
Philippe Aries | Encyclopedia.com 
The Hour of Our Death (Philippe Ariès) — The Mortal Atheist 