












Investigation 13-C
Monocot vs. Dicot Lab






















Theodore Chiu
SBI3U
Biology 11
June 4, 2024
Mrs. S. Tam
Pre-lab Questions:

What microscopic characteristics distinguish a monocot and a dicot?

There are microscopic characteristics that distinguish a monocot and a dicot. In terms of the seed and fruit development of a plant, a monocot only has one cotyledon, while a dicot has two cotyledons. Furthermore, the endosperm is the major part of the seed in a monocot, while in the dicot, the endosperm is absorbed by the cotyledon as the seed matures. Second, roots in monocots have vascular tissue arranged in a ring-shape, while the vascular tissue in dicots are organized in a star shape. Lastly, for monocots, the vascular bundles in stem are dispersed throughout ground tissue, while in dicots, the vascular bundles in stems are arranged in a distinct ring-shape. 

What macroscopic (visible to unaided eye) characteristics distinguish a monocot and a dicot?

On a macroscopic level, the petals and organs of a monocot are found in multiples of 3. For example, the white trillium is a monocot, and it has three petals, three sepal, and six stamen. On the other hand, dicots have petals and organs that are found in multiples of four and five. The root system of a monocot is typically fibrous. On the other hand, dicots have a taproot. Lastly, in monocots, the veins usually run parallel along the length of the leaf, while in dicots, the veins are palmate or pinnate. 

Why is it important to wash your hands after completing an investigation?

It is important to wash your hands after completing an investigation because there may be chemicals or substances that are harmful to the body and skin. Furthermore, since many students eat after an experiment, it is important to wash hands to avoid digesting substances from the experiment that may be harmful to the body.

Procedure:

Each of the plants shown on the right is the floral emblem of a Canadian   province or territory. Determine which are monocots and which are dicots.

The white trillium, prairie crocus, prairie lily, blue flag iris, lady slipper, and purple saxifrage are monocots. The mayflower, wild rose, purple violet, dogwood tree, pitcher plant, fireweed, and mountain avens, are dicots. 

Analyze and Interpret:

What differences did you observe in the external appearance of monocot and dicot plants?

The first difference between the external appearance of a monocot and dicot is that the petals and organs in monocots are found in multiples of 3, while the petals and organs in dicots are found in multiples of 4 or 5. For example, the white trillium is a monocot, and it has 3 petals, 3 sepals, and 6 stamens. On the other hand, an example of a dicot is the mountain avens, which has 8 petals. Second, the veins of the leaf in a monocot are usually parallel, while veins in a dicot are usually palmate or pinnate. Next, the root systems of monocots are usually fibrous, while the dicots usually have a taproot. Lastly, the leaf of the alstroemeria, a monocot, was narrower, while the chrysanthemum, a dicot, had a wider leaf. 

Which class dominates the official list of floral emblems?

Dicots slightly dominate the official list of floral emblems.  

Inquiry:

Dichotomous Key

Refer to ‘Dichotomous Key of Floral Emblems’ attached to the back of the report. 