Theodore Chiu
ENG3U
Mrs. Choi
October, 30, 2023
Education: The Key to Reconciliation Between Indigenous People and Settlers
Fires can be warm and gentle. Yet, the relationship between the First Nations people and settlers of Canada have been nothing close to a peaceful fire. The seven fires known by the Anishinaabe predict the life of their tribe (Talaga, 2021). Tanya Talaga, author of Seven Fallen Feathers, a non-fiction text about seven deaths in Thunder Bay, writes, “Each fire represents a key time in the history of the people on Turtle Island, the continent of North America” (Talaga, 2021, p. 16). The sixth fire speaks about the deception of the light-skinned, where Indigenous children and culture would be lost; in the seventh fire, the young would rise up and seek wisdom from the Elders, but many of the Elders would have passed (Talaga, 2021). If the Indigenous people decide to reclaim their heritage, culture, and history, they will arrive at the eighth fire, the final fire. The eighth fire will be a time of peace, brotherhood, and sisterhood. CBC created a mini-series in 2012 titled the 8th Fire (Dawson, 2012). On Canada’s History, Joanna Dawson writes in the article, “8th Fire portrays Indigenous/non-Indigenous relations as a continuous path, which is informed by the past, but whose course can easily be changed by working together in the present '' (Dawson, 2012, para. 3). However, because young children were rounded up like cattle and led to have their culture slaughtered, because of the physical abuse young kids like Chanie Wenjack experienced, because of the racial profiling and brutality of the police, and because of racist remarks of uneducated citizens towards First Nations people, it is not unfair for many to say that the eighth fire can never be reached.  Indigenous people cannot have reconciliation with white settlers when they are treated as less than white settlers. To approach reconciliation and harmony, Indigenous people must exit their cycle of poverty, a cycle that was inflicted upon them by settlers who stole their land. Many may ask how it is possible for this to happen, and whether the efforts towards reconciliation should lie within the responsibility of the Indigenous people or with the settlers. Responsibility, however, lies in both parties. If the government gives all the support and funding towards Indigenous communities, but there is no effort from the Indigenous to try to improve their situation, then it is useless. If the Indigenous people put all their strength into getting out of poverty and seeking reconciliation, there will be no change in the relationship if the Canadian government does not admit their wrong doings and apologize through action. Reconciliation can be achieved through the government’s efforts to support the Indigenous education system, while the Indigenous people have a purposeful mindset to approach the eighth fire through education and a willing heart to forgive. 
	While the government of Canada can offer sincere apologies and government funding for infrastructure in Indigenous communities, reconciliation lies within the government’s effort to support Indigenous education systems. Julian Falconer is an example of why education can help Indigenous people reach the eighth fire. Falconer is one of the key players in Seven Fallen Feathers. Talaga (2021) describes one of Falconer’s cases:
During the Second World War, the Canadian government tried to expropriate land from Stony Point First Nation so they could build a training camp; Ottawa promised the government would give the land back to Stony Point when they were done. Stony Point refused, saying the land the government wanted was an old burial ground. The government took the land away. (pp. 227-228)
Thirty Stony Point members peacefully protested, but Dudley George, an Ojibwe protester was killed by the Ontario Provincial Police (Talaga, 2021). Falconer represented Indigenous people in this case and ripped apart the premier at that time, Mike Harris (Talaga, 2021). Mike Harris had ordered the protest to end, saying that he wanted the Indians off his land (Talaga, 2021). Without people like Falconer, the injustice would not have gone away. Falconer was able to represent the Indigenous people of Stony Point because he was aware of the injustices they faced. In order to help Indigenous people, one must first be aware. Being aware comes through being educated. Clifford Kokopenace, a Grassy Narrows First Nations is another example. He was on trial for the death of Taylor Assin in Kenora (Talaga, 2021). He was charged with manslaughter (Talaga, 2021). Talaga explains the injustice in this case, stating,  “The jury on the case failed to reflect the population of Kenora – about one-third of the population of 65,000 was Indigenous. Out of 699 potential jurors, only 29 were Indigenous people who lived on reserves” (Talaga, 2021, p.231). Indigenous people were not being properly represented in Canadian courts. Indigenous people “were being charged by white officers and then they were tried and judged by white people” (Talaga, 2021, p. 241). Indigenous people can only represent their own communities when they are in the positions of jurors, lawyers, prosecutors, or judges. Indigenous people have a proper understanding of Indigenous culture and can make just decisions based on their knowledge. Education allows non-Indigenous people to be aware and act upon the injustices of Indigenous people, and education is the path that allows Indigenous people to be in positions of decision making to properly represent their own people. 
	There has been a lack of effort from the Canadian government, but it is important for both Indigenous people and non-Indigenous people to recognize the steps that the Canadian government has taken towards reconciliation. When Victorian culture arrived in Canada, there was momentarily peace and success for both sides due to the fur trade (Talaga 2021). Yet, once the fur trade died, the Indigenous were left helpless, with a seeming need to assimilate in order to survive (Talaga, 2021). English seemed necessary to survive, while Indigenous cultures and language were not. Talaga (2021) describes the origin and evolution of schools many Indigenous children went to: “Already in 1870, the Sisters of St. Joseph had opened a Catholic orphanage on the Fort William side….The Sisters of St. Joseph would eventually morph into the St. Joseph’s Indian Residential School (also known as the Fort William Indian Residential School)” (p. 9). Talaga continues to describe how children were rounded up from their communities by the RCMP and taken to these schools; there were agents that made sure “all the Indians'' were kept in line, too (Talaga, 2021). A Catholic school now sits where the residential school once was (Talaga, 2021). Though none of these schools taught Indigenous values or culture, Canada has come quite far by offering Indigenous language and culture courses in schools. In a CBC report titled “Ontario has ‘come quite far’ on Indigenous education but there’s much more to be done” written by Desmond Brown (2023), the 2022-23 Annual Ontario School Survey states that “72% per cent of secondary schools reported offering an Indigenous studies in course in 2022-23” (p.2). Brown (2023) continues: “14 school boards are replacing the compulsory Grade 11 English course with an Indigenous-focused course centered on First Nations, Métis, and Inuit voices” (p. 2). Canada has taken steps towards reconciliation by recognizing the value of Indigenous culture and taken action by implementing Indigenous courses. 
	Though the introduction of Indigenous studies have been large steps towards reconciliation, the government can still do a lot more. Brock Pitawanakwat is a coordinator if Indigenous programs at York University (Brown, 2023, p.3). In an interview with CBC news, Pitawanakwat said, “... looking back, often Indigenous education was something that I think teachers struggled with because they hadn’t received this education themselves” (Brown, 2023, p. 3). If teachers and staff are not being well-trained, there is a large chance for the history and culture of Indigenous communities to be incorrectly taught and for there to be a lack of truth. Secondly, there is a large majority of non-Indigenous children who will not choose to take Indigenous courses. People for Education, a research institute in Toronto, made the following recommendations to the Ministry of Education: “Mandate the Indigenous studies course in place of Grade 11 English/French.…Convene a task force of diverse and regionally reflective Indigenous education, Elders, and students to support the Ministry of Education and the 72 publicly funded school boards across Ontario in responding to the Calls to Action regarding education” (Brown, 2023). Mandating an Indigenous studies course will spread the history and truth of Indigenous communities, and it will also highlight what can be done, especially what youth can do. If youth are aware, Indigenous and non-Indigenous students can utilize their skills to fight against the unjust court systems and police brutality among Indigenous communities. Therefore, Indigenous people and settlers can approach the eighth fire if the government mandates Indigenous studies as well as provides a diverse and well-trained staff to teach and support Indigenous studies. 
	Indigenous people may be able to exit their current cycle of poverty alone, but with government support in Indigenous education, not only can they reach financial success more quickly, but Indigenous people and settlers can be reconciled together. Canada’s National Observer released an article titled ‘The money’s not there’: First Nations schools in Ontario stretched thin by limited resources, piecemeal funding.” Journalist Matteo Cimellaro (2023) describes Indigenous funding like this: “Every March, Indigenous high schools undertake fiscal gymnastics when funding dries up three months before the end of the school year” (p.10). A school with low funding is likely to be understaffed, and when a school is understaffed, kids do not get the attention they need. Robyn Harper is an example of this. According to reports, Robyn Harper died of acute ethanol toxicity, and her death was an accident (Talaga, 2021). Harper had been binge drinking with her friends until David Fox, a Northern Nishnawbe Education Council staff member, found her and dropped her off at home (Talaga, 2021). Because he was unaware that alcohol poisoning could lead to death, Jonathan Rudin, the lawyer at the inquest stated that “Robyn’s death was no accident” (Talaga, 2021, p. 198). Talaga (2021) continues: “... he called it homicide. He argued that alcohol poisoning doesn’t have to be fatal if the person in question is taken to the hospital in time” (pp. 198-199). In a coroner’s case, homicide does not require intention (Talaga, 2021). Rudin stated, “There is no question the NNEC is trying its best, and there’s not a lot of money, but they did have services they held out to be capable and competent and they were neither” (Talaga, 2021, p. 199). Robyn’s death shows how no matter how diligent and how hard one works, because of a lack of funding, staff will be overwhelmed and make mistakes, and these mistakes will lead to disasters. Cimellaro (2023) recorded director of the NNEC Dobi-Dawn Frenette’s words regarding funding in Indigenous schools: “Funding for Indigenous schools handed out by the federal government reached parity with the rest of Canada after 2016. Today, these institutions receive $12,000 per student per year. But before, Indigenous schools were given $6,200 a year per student – roughly half of what provincially funded schools got and continue to receive…” (p.3). Though Indigenous students seem to have an equal education opportunity, both Indigenous staff and students face many challenges. Students at Matawa Education Centre had been using a classroom as a gym (Cimellaro, 2023). A new gym was going to be built, but planners had to make cuts to the facility because of rising costs post the pandemic (Cimellaro, 2023). On the other hand, a provincial school at Churchill built a new gym in a few months; the school is across from Dennis Franklin Cromatry high school, which is an all Indigenous school (Cimellaro, 2023). This shows that Indigenous kids and staff are not being treated the same from the government. Cimellaro (2023) writes, “Take, for example, one meeting between Matawa Education Centre, which represents 12 First Nations in northern Ontario, and the provincial government. On the province’s side were 10 professionals….On Matawa’s side of the table was the principal, education director, and student achievement office…” (p.5). This stark difference shows how the government seems to have ample funding to spend, while Indigenous educators are taking on many different roles due to lack of funds. A.J. Haapa was a history teacher, but because of understaffing issues, he had to take on the role of fulfilling the recommendations after the inquest, including developing proposals for a new school and residence (Cimillaro, 2023). Instead of having to write a proposal for every grant to secure basic needs that students deserved, Haapa hopes to secure stable funding (Cimillaro, 2023). This stable funding will allow more time to be spent on Indigenous students, to ensure they are developing both academically and socially. It will allow teachers to go back to teaching in the field they are trained in. The highschool art teacher at Matawa also had to switch into an administrative position because of all the paperwork involved with proposals (Cimillaro, 2023). If the government does not properly and stably fund Indigenous schools, teachers will continue to become administrators, Indigenous educators will continue to perform multiple jobs at the same time, and Indigenous students will not get the attention they need. 
	The fire of distrust between Indigenous people and the settlers ignited when Indigenous land was taken. It continued to burn when Indigenous culture was stolen during the Indian Act and when little children were taken away in the Sixties Scoop. It still burns with the injustices of the court and police brutality towards Indigenous people. In order to bring this relationship to a peaceful and warm flame, the government can support Indigenous education systems. However, Indigenous communities must be willing to forgive, move on, and strive to exit the cycle of poverty they are in. With high-quality education in Indigenous communities, First Nations people can represent their communities in courts, as well as in the police system. The government has taken steps towards reconciliation. For example, Indigenous study courses have allowed many people to become aware and support Indigenous people. Julian Falconer was only able to represent Indigenous people because he was aware of the injustices they faced. Mandating Indigenous courses will allow the truth to reach even more people, so that more people can make a difference. This was one of Tanya Talaga’s goals when she wrote Seven Fallen Feathers. Lastly, the Canadian government can provide financial support to Indigenous schools like Matawa Education Centre and Dennis Franklin Cromarty High School, so teachers can spend more time on their students instead of chasing after funds in a river of red tape. Thus, if the Canadian government takes action to improve and fund Indigenous education and the Indigenous people have a strong mentality to work hard to achieve success with a willing heart to forgive the settlers of Canada, Indigenous people can reach the eighth fire, a time of peace and reconciliation, a warm and gentle fire.







References
Brown, D. (2023, April 24). Ontario has “come quite far” on indigenous education but there’s much more to be done: Report | CBC News. CBCnews. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/ontario-indigenous-education-1.6820604
Cimellaro, M. (2023, August 2). “The money’s not there”: First nations schools in Ontario stretched thin by limited resources, piecemeal funding. Canada’s National Observer. https://www.nationalobserver.com/2023/05/30/news/moneys-not-there-first-nations-schools-ontario-stretched-thin
Dawson, J. (2012, January 19). CBC’s 8th fire. CBC’s 8th Fire - Canada’s History. https://www.canadashistory.ca/education/classroom-resources/cbc-s-8th-fire 
Talaga, T. (2021). Seven fallen feathers: Racism, death, and hard truths in a Northern City. Scribe Publications. 



