Who are each of the Seven Fallen Feathers? What does each story teach us?

(Order of Death)

Jordan’s Principle: Allowed protection of Indigenous children by always putting the needs of the child ahead of cost considerations or liability. 

Jordan Wabasse: 
Life in Reserves: food flown in, no good school, lack of clean water. 
Talaga shares how she was pulled in to write SFF, and uses the same tactic (repetition) to pull us in her perspective. 
Jethro forced to leave home to get a good education, but a change in environment leads to his death. 
Poor police efforts.

Jethro Anderson: 
Lack of effort and professionalism of the Thunder Bay police (Jethro and MMIWG).
Dora’s call not returned.
Immediately released as accident. 
MMIWG numbers were different.  
Lack of good education: either DFC that has bad environment or move to the city, just to get education. 

Curran Strang: 
Government supporting other country but not their own people. 
Racism, colonialism, social exclusion lead to current addiction, abuse, mental health, parents not knowing how to parent, which leads to suicide. 

Paul Panacheese: 
Impact of intergenerational trauma in Maryanne’s family (sister Sarah, being sent to res. School as a child).
Negligence in autopsy and medical examiner (destroyed evidence).  

Robyn Harper: 
NNEC staff are overrun, leading to not giving appropriate care, neglect/ignorance. 
Poor coroner professionalism.
Racial profiling of police.

Reggie Bushie: 
Fed and Prov government cannot decided who should pay for child services for kids on reserves. 
Unequal jury.
Poor police job (accident). 
Unequal rights vote at UN.

Kyle Morrisseau: 
If parents want to send their kids to get a education, they either have to go to DFC (common substance abuse, not great environment). What boarding school does to good kids like Kyle because there really wasn’t much option, when you consider finances, too. 

Why is historical context important in understanding this book?

Historical context is important in understanding SFF because the reason why Indigenous societies are in the shape they are (no clean water, no proper education, etc…) is because of the affects of colonialism (where their good land was taken, being viewed as savages to modern racism), residential school (trauma of abuse and cultural genocide), the Indian Act (aparthied, designed to assimilate so there would be no financial obligation according to Tagala). History is studied so it is not repeated. Ongoing issues of racism, lack of water, etc… are still present. From understanding the history, people can derive a solution from compiling evidence of previous efforts and failures. 

What is the significance of the number 7 in this book?

It connects to the 7 fires (prophecies). 

1-3: life before Europeans. 
4: predicts the coming of light skin and what would happen. 
5: war and suffering (promise of salvation from someone, but if they listened, they would be lost for generations). 
6: light skin would wear a mask of death; people deceived; the past forgotten. 
7: the young would rise up and seek help from their elders. 

It connects to Anishinaabe’s 7 principles.

1: love (to know love is to know peace).
2: respect (to honor all of creation is to have respect).
3: bravery (to face life with courage is to know bravery).
4: honesty (to walk through life with integrity is to know honesty).
5: humility (to accept yourself as a sacred part of creation is to know humility).
6: wisdom (to cherish knowledge is to know wisdom).
7: truth (to know of these things is to know the truth). 


How is racism explored in the issues faced by the seven fallen feathers and other indigenous youth? Consider how it may be embedded in systems, institutions (like the police), and policies.

Paul experienced lots of racism. Mom told him to turn the other cheek. 

Curran and his friends were called bogans. Police ignored this. 

Shawson Wavy was put in a cell despite being severely injured by police after being beaten up by white men. 

Racism comes to play as a lasting effect from colonialism, where the Indigenous kids are viewed as savages. Because Indigenous people are caught in this cycle of poverty, most jobs like policing, are occupied by white men, many of which view Indigenous as a ‘type’ that gets drunk, uses drugs, and doesn’t deserve the care other kids deserve. 

The Indian Act is still indirectly in effect. Many Indigenous still live on reserves. Indigenous were sent to reserves after having their land unjustly taken away through unfair treaties. The effects of the Indian Act are still in place, though the policy has been updated. Take the stark division of Port Arthur (white) and Fort William (indigenous).  

Consider this nonfiction text in terms of organization and author’s purpose. What can you infer about the way Talaga chose to divide her chapters?

Tagala divided her chapters into anecdotes, historical background (provides reason why Indigenous people are in their current condition), a case (a modern example of the trauma and neglect that still exists), and her take (she has a take she wants the reader to have, that the ‘accidents’ aren’t really just accident). 

Explain the journey and the results of the inquest. What were the results, and what more needs to be done.

Falconer wrote to include all 7 fallen feathers in the inquest. The jury made 145 recommendations. Some things have been done, such as daily patrol of police by the river NAN’s summer youth programs. But simple things like deciding whether to install cameras is still ongoing. 

Education needs to be done. This means having support, following up with students, ensuring each individual student has the care they need to exit a cycle of substance abuse and poverty. 

Talaga poses a question to the reader in the epilogue. Please respond to this question: Can the settlers and the Indigenous people who come together as one and move forward in harmony?

The settlers and Indigenous people can come together as one (not assimilation but cooperation) and move on in harmony. It takes an apology, but words alone are not sufficient. The ‘settlers’ need to act to show that they are sorry, not just saying it. This includes fulfilling promises of improvements of schools (funding and cultural heritage). However, the Indigenous must, too, forgive, and move onward to seek reconciliation.

What is the meaning of this work as a whole? How do you know? Does she do this effectively? Defend your answer. 

The message of Seven Fallen Feathers is to bring awareness of the sufferings of Indigenous people from the past and even now. Unresolved struggles of Indigenous communities in Canada, including intergenerational trauma and lack of resources, is a result of colonialism, systemic racism, and lack of governmental support. None of the deaths have solid evidence of a direct cause, except for Robyn (alcohol). Tagala is including these deaths to bring awareness that the causes of these deaths is because of intergenerational trauma from residential schools, lack of funding from the government). The book is repetitive in: police unprofessionalism (Reggie, Jethro, Jordan) , poor education/living conditions (Mish, Pik), mysterious deaths (seven fallen feathers). 

She does this effectively in the sense of pathos, not logos. Her bias is strong, where sometimes she seems to overlook the truth (Reggie can swim well, but he was drunk), to force evidence to align with her view. But she does mention NNEC David’s Fox seeming mistake.

Explain the role of intergenerational trauma in the experiences of indigenous youth in TB and its surround communities as revealed through the stories in this book. Consider the ways in which trauma is cyclical.

Parents who suffered from sexual and physical and cultural abuse – if they cannot overcome it – will have an effect on their child. They will not be able to properly parent and raise their child. For example, after abuse, a parent may rely on substances and alcohol. This will make the parent mentally absent and make the parent in a state where they too, may abuse their own children. 

Maryanne forced to go to residential school with siblings at a young age. Took train. Mohawk school, which she was not. This trauma left a mark on her family. 

Reflect on what you have learned about nonfiction texts. Consider the differences in approach, analysis, organization, and features as compared to reading fiction texts. 

Nonfiction texts are meant to relay information, but can take a large portion of pathos in it. Nonfiction texts can call for change. Fiction exists as parts of nonfiction: deaths, police mistake, racism, etc….Like when you imagine a unicorn: horse and horn. Nonfiction seeks to convince the reader usually through facts and evidence. The message in SFF is not just a story that creates a sense of pleasure, but it is a real and current message that calls for change and action. 

Providing current cases (present issues of Indigenous and how the Indigenous and government/police are responding), historical background (issues of the past and reasons for why Indigenous are in the situation they are in), and her take (can be seen as the fiction portion of the book, but her conclusions are aimed to be base on facts and repetition of the poor police efforts and lack of governmental support. 