Theodore Chiu
Nov 27, 2023

Artist:

In Subway Stations of the Cross, Ins Choi writes the poem “Bread”. This drawing, Bread, is inspired by the poem. Choi includes multiple themes related to how a church should function. The main theme relates to how the Church of Christ has strayed from God and drawn close to the world. Choi writes in stanza 6, “Church of the Holy Sepulchre built / On top of / Temple of love / a.k.a Venus / Planet Venus / Love…/ Caught in bed / Invisible net” (lines 35-48). Choi includes this passage to signify how the church has drifted to have its foundation on an eros type of love, not just meaning lust, but a love that is rooted in desire, desire of the world. Furthermore, in stanza 6, Choi also talks about the “Church of the Holy Sepulchre” (line 12) and then writes about how “Three hundred years  Jesus following was legalized” (line 21). The Church of the Holy Sepulchre church, which is depicted on the upper half of the drawing, was constructed circa 300 AD. To connect these two pieces of evidence, it is likely that Choi is writing about the church, in all time periods, falling into traps of becoming an industry or business, rather than the people of Christ, founded on the love of Christ. A church should be built on Christ. 1 John 4:8 states, “Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love.” The love here is agape love, a self-sacrificial love. Dying to ourselves and picking up our cross are necessary features of this agape love. Christ first loved us this way (1 John 4:19). This is depicted in the man picking up his cross in the left corner. Choi is reminding us that first, without Jesus, there is no church. And second, because of Jesus’ love, which allows the church to exist, the church can only flourish when we show this love to God and to others. The red trail on the drawing represents Christ’s blood and true love from Christians; it is what makes the church stand out to the world. It is a symbol of light in the darkness, colour in a black and white world. The picture shows the Temple of Aphrodite, representing the desires of the world, as a foundation for the church, which has sadly become a reality for some. The man picking up the cross is a symbol of what the church should be founded on and how it can represent the church. If our church is founded on eros love or by a means for self-gain, the church then becomes just a building, no different than the Temple of Aphrodite. 

Lastly, you’ll see in the bottom right corner of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, there is a piece of bread. Psalm 118:22 states, “The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone. Christ, the Bread of Life, is the Cornerstone, the only thing that can hold up the church, the body of Christ. 