Theodore Chiu
Jun 14, 2024
Law 12 Final Exam
Question 1:
The first issue is whether the Charter applies. According to s. 32, a plaintiff can only raise Charter arguments against the government or a government actor. In Multani, the school board was considered a government actor. In this case, Dragon Academy is a public school under the governance of the Toronto District School Board, and the TDSB’s guideline is a provincial guideline. Mr. Kai, the principal of Dragon Academy is a government actor, who works for Dragon Academy and the TDSB, so therefore, the Charter applies. 
The next issue is whether Mr. Roshi’s freedom of religion was violated under s. 2(a) of the Charter. Under s. 2(a) of the Charter, all people are guaranteed the freedom of conscience and religion. In Syndicat Northcrest v. Amselem, it was concluded that the government may not interfere with beliefs or practices which the plaintiff sincerely believes forms a part of their religion. In this case, Mr. Roshi’s religious freedom is infringed upon because the TDSB guideline violates his sincere, Christian belief. Forcing Mr. Roshi to observe and comply with a guideline that is contrary to a sincerely held belief infringes his freedom of religion. Mr. Roshi states that if he were to comply with Bulma’s request, he would be supporting something that is considered ‘sin’ in his religion. In his religion, Mr. Roshi should confront sin; however, the TDSB is forcing Mr. Roshi to endorse sin. Thus, the TDSB is preventing Mr. Roshi from practicing his religion, as well as, divine obedience towards God, and thus, the TDSB guideline infringed upon his freedom of religion. 
The next issue is whether the guideline shows a violation of the freedom of expression, whether it passes the Irwin Toy test. Anything that conveys meaning or has content falls under this umbrella. Threats or violent words are not considered expressive (Irwin Toy). In this case, Mr. Roshi, in a democratic society,  conveys meaning by sharing a view, opposing a view, or not following a certain rule. He shows no hatred towards transgender students and in fact cares for them. Therefore, it violates the freedom of expression.
	The next issue is whether the purpose or effect of the government’s action is to restrict the plaintiff’s freedom of expression. The rule is that in order to pass this prong of the Irwin Toy test, the form of content or meaning must be restricted, not just a physical consequence, like littering. If the government does not have a restrictive purpose, but still a restrictive effect, it still passes the test. It is considered to have a restrictive effect if it withholds a person from truth seeking, participating in societal/democratic issues, and seeking individual fulfillment. In this case, the government is restricting forms of expression that may be derogatory towards transgenders individuals. The government also has a restrictive effect by preventing Mr. Roshi from truth seeking (regarding issues of gender), participating in societal/democratic issues (voicing opinions regarding gender), and seeking individual fulfillment (through his religion). Thus, the Irwin Toy test passes.
The next issue is whether there was a pressing and substantial purpose for the TDSB guideline and the termination of Mr. Roshi. The government may limit a constitutional right if the limit serves a pressing and substantial purpose. The purpose of the TDSB’s guidelines, stating that “All students, including transgender and gender non-conforming students, have the right to be addressed by a preferred name and pronouns corresponding to their gender identity” is to protect transgender students. The TDSB guideline states “Transgender or gender-nonconforming individuals, have the right to be who they are openly. This includes expressing gender identity without fear of unwanted consequences. As well as the right to be treated with dignity and respect” (pg. 6). The purpose of Mr. Kai’s decision to terminate Mr. Roshi was likely to uphold the same purposes found in the TDSB guidelines – protection of transgender rights and prevention of harm for their identity. Protection of rights and the prevention of unwanted harms that transgender students may face is a pressing and substantial purpose in a free and democratic society. 
The next issue is whether there is a rational connection between the TDSB guideline, along with Mr. Roshi’s termination, and the purpose of protection of rights and prevention of harm. By requiring that transgender students should be addressed by their choice of pronouns and name is rationally connected to the protection of transgender rights. The requirement of TDSB is connected to the prevention of harms to prevent transgender students from being called derogatory names such as “sissy,” “he-she,” or “freak.” Therefore, the TDSB guideline in connection with Mr. Kai’s decision to terminate Mr. Roshi is rationally connected to the purpose.
The next test is the minimal impairment test, regarding the violation of Mr. Roshi’s freedom of religion – whether every part of the limit is necessary or if there are less invasive ways to achieve the purpose. The limit must be minimally invasive in order to be a reasonable limit. In Zybelberg v. Sudbury Board of Education, a regulation required schools to include the Lord’s Prayer in their opening exercises. This regulation was struck down because it was not minimally invasive. In this case, the TDSB requires all staff and students to refer to transgender students by their preferred pronouns and name. Though one could argue that though the TDSB guideline is not religious, it demeans other religions, like Christianity and Islam, it would still be permissible because it is not a direct religious guideline. In Halpern, the court stated that the benefit of another group’s right cannot violate another group’s right. A blanket termination of those who do not agree with transgender rights is not minimally invasive. The TDSB should allow exemptions on a case by case scenario in order to preserve the purpose of harm-prevention and the protection of transgender rights. So one way in which it can be less invasive is to separate teachers who do not agree with transgender issues from transgender students. This allows kids like Bulma to not face any adverse impact, while allowing Mr. Roshi to keep his freedoms under the Charter. Thus, Mr. Kai’s decision was overbroad of its purpose in preventing mistreatment of transgender students and upholding transgender rights. 
The last issue is the proportionality test. Specifically, the issue is whether the government’s actions and benefits outweigh the harms. If there is a balanced proportionality, the limit is reasonable. Though Mr. Roshi lost his job, in Irwin Toy, financial loss was not deemed to be a very impactful harm. Although the protection of transgender rights can be considered a great benefit, the necessity of the guideline is not. The reality is that Christians and Muslims, for example, do have an opposing view to transgender issues; however, there is no evidence that these people groups are the cause of harm that transgenders will face. In implementing the guideline, all Christians and Muslims must go against their religious convictions. Something that is related to the divine and eternal condemnation must surely be greater than that which is on a worldly level. Furthermore, people of religions that believe in 2 genders will either be forced out of their job, meaning that the diversity in teachers to students ratio will be a lot lower, or forced to go against their religious convictions, something s. 2(a) protects. There will be no Christian staff that can help Christian students. This concept of diversity was seen as an issue in OTCC v. Ontario. Additionally, not addressing someone by their preferred pronouns is not necessarily out of hatred but out of conviction to a religion. The negative effect Bulma faces is just one person not calling her by her preferred pronouns. It cannot be considered as hate speech because there is no connotation towards extreme emotions or association with vilification and detestation. Regarding the nature of neutrality of the ‘secular’ gender law, in Chamberlain v. Surrey School District, it was determined that books depicting same-sex families should be removed from the list of approved teaching materials. C. J. McLaughlin wrote, “The demand for tolerance cannot be interpreted as the demand to approve another person’s beliefs or practices. When we ask people to be tolerant of others, we don’t ask them to abandon their personal convictions. We merely ask them to respect the rights…” (para. 66).  This shows that Mr. Roshi’s denial to use preferred pronouns and Bulma’s rights must be respected. Mr. Roshi is not expressing hatred or forcing Bulma to change. He is tolerating it, while maintaining his religious convictions. If Mr. Roshni were forced to use he/him pronouns, there would be no respect towards his religion. The transgenders would be trying to ‘convert’ him. Some could argue that even by allowing one person to misgender another, it does not fully serve the purpose, but if it is only Mr. Roshi misgendering Bulma and Mr. Roshi’s freedom of expression and religion can be maintained (a great benefit), it is reasonably proportional. Thus, the harms outweigh the benefits. 
	Thus, the TDSB guideline should be struck down and instead replaced with the rule that no hate speech towards transgender individuals is permitted. 



OHRC:
	The first issue is whether the law applies. The OHRC covers the areas of goods and services, accommodations, contracts, and employment. Mr. Kai, Dragon Academy, and the TDSB all provide a service (education) and employment.  Therefore, the law applies. 
	The next issue is whether there was discrimination. To prove that a plaintiff was discriminated against, the plaintiff must show that they had a characteristic (protected by the code) which led to adverse treatment. Creed is a protected ground under the OHRC. Mr. Roshi was not terminated because of his religious belief, but because of his views on gender issues, which stemmed from his religion. Therefore, it is not discrimination. One could argue that it is discrimination because it results in the exclusion of a certain group, such as Muslims and Christians, who believe that there are only 2 genders. In Re: Same Sex Marriage, religious officials could refuse to perform marriages against their convictions. However, Dragon Academy is not a private school. The analogous case of Re: Same Sex Marriage would apply if it were a private, non-TDSB, Christina school. Therefore, it is not discriminatory. 
Section 11(1)(a) provides employers with a bona fide defense against claims of adverse effect discrimination. Even if it was considered as discrimination (neutral rule with discriminatory effect), the guideline would likely pass the bona fide requirements founded in Meiron because the guideline was enacted out of good reason and to serve a legitimate purpose, to protect transgender individuals and their rights. However, it may not pass ‘reasonably necessary’ because the reality is that the guideline is more for transgender individuals to feel accepted, not to prevent harm (ie. emotional harm from name-calling). If it was regarding emotional harm, there should be a seperate guideline specifically regarding negative name-calling, not just addressing someone based on their preferred pronouns. However, it would still likely pass the BFOR test. 
The next issue is whether it passes the undue hardship requirement. Under OHRC s. 11(2) it must show that accommodating the plaintiff would impose on the employer an undue hardship. This was not shown. Mr. Roshi was fired immediately after addressing his concerns. There was no meeting to further discuss the issue or work out accommodations. Furthermore, supporting Mr. Roshi would not result in ruinous cost, health and safety risk, or a change in the nature of the school. His presence would be like a drop of water in the ocean – one teacher who does not refer to a child’s desired pronouns. Thus, Mr. Roshi’s termination was not justified, and could be considered discriminatory. 



Question 2:
The first issue is whether the Charter applies. According to s. 32, a plaintiff can only raise Charter arguments against the government or government actors. In Multani, the school board was considered a government actor. In this case, Dragon Academy is a public school under the governance of the Toronto District School Board, and the TDSB’s guideline is a provincial guideline. Mr. Kai, the principal of Dragon Academy is a government actor, who works for Dragon Academy and the TDSB, so therefore, the Charter applies. 
The next issue is infringement. It is considered a violation of equality under s.15 if the government is imposing burden or withholding benefits, directly or indirectly, on the basis of a prohibited personal characteristic (Andrews). In Vriend, the court concluded that sexual orientation was a prohibited personal characteristic. In Halpern, the court determined that it was unequal for homosexual couples not to receive marriage licenses. In this case, like Vriend and Halpern, Bulma is being withheld the benefit of being addressed by her proper pronouns and name, something that male and female are allowed. She is being withheld from a benefit. Thus, it is a violation of the right to equality. 
The next issue is pressing and substantial purpose. The government is allowed to limit a constitutional right if it has a pressing and substantial purpose. The purpose of Mr. Kai’s decision is to protect the Mr. Roshi’s freedom of religion and expression. Thus, it passes. 
The next issue is whether there is a rational connection between the purpose and the limit. If there is a connection, the limit is justified. By allowing Mr. Roshi to use the pronouns she/her, it is protecting Mr. Roshi’s freedom of religion and freedom of expression. In order to preserve Mr. Roshi’s freedom of religion, allowing him to use she/her pronouns is the only way. If he were to use he/him pronouns, he would be supporting something that is deemed a ‘sin’ in his religion, and this would violate his freedom of religion, as well as the ability to seek truth. Thus, it passes. 
The next issue is whether it is minimally invasive. If there are less invasive ways, they must be considered. Bulma’s right to equality is infringed because she is withheld a benefit that others can have. While others can be referred to by their pronouns and desired name, she cannot. However, it is minimally invasive because it is only 1 exception that Mr. Kai has made. Mr. Kai has not changed Dragon Academy’s policy, saying that all people can call Bulma by she/her pronouns. Furthermore, Bulma is still allowed to use male washrooms and changerooms. Thus, it is minimally invasive. 
The next issue is proportionality. By allowing Mr. Roshi to continue to use the pronouns she/her, the benefits must outweigh the harms. The benefits include preserving Mr. Roshi’s freedom of religion and expression. In the Re: s. 293, the court recognized the preservation of the monogamous marriage as valid. Preserving the tradition of 2 genders will help preserve the idea and tradition of a monogamous marriage. The harms may include the fact that Bulma may not feel accepted by 1 teacher and emotionally hurt. This may also create contention between two groups and cause societal disruption. The miniscule emotional damage that Bulma may face due to 1 person calling her by her original pronouns does not outweigh the benefits Mr. Roshi’s rights. Mr. Roshi has not shown any form of hatred towards transgender students, nor towards Bulma. He in fact cares for her, stating it is “for her own good and correction.” Therefore, the benefits outweigh the harms. 
However, one remedy for this issue could be for transgender students to be taught be transgender-affirming teachers.

OHRC:
	The first issue is whether the TDSB is under the OHRC. The OHRC covers areas of goods and service and employment. The TDSB provides education and employment. Therefore, the law applies. 
	The next issue is whether there is discrimination under the OHRC. The rule is that the plaintiff must show that they faced adverse harm due to a protected personal characteristic. In this case, the protected characteristic is gender identity and gender expression. However, there is no adverse effect. A single person calling Bulma by her original pronouns is a miniscule effect. Even if there was an adverse impact, Dragon Academy is supporting Mr. Roshi, and they have not reached a point of undue hardship. It would pass the bona fide requirements because there is a legitimate purpose (Mr. Roshi’s freedom of religion and expression), it was adopted in good faith, and there is no other way for Mr. Roshi’s right to exist. Furthermore,  Bulma is not facing undue hardship, nor is Dragon Academy. The standard is necessary in supporting Mr. Roshi’s freedoms of religion and expression. Thus, Dragon Academy’s and Mr. Kai’s decision is reasonable. 

Question 3:
	The first issue is whether the law applies. Charter arguments can only be raised against the government. TDSB and Dragon Academy are government actors. Thus, the law applies.
	The next issue is whether the TDSB’s decision to withhold Bulma’s gender identity from her parents violates s. 7. A s. 7 violation occurs when there has been a deprivation of life, liberty, or security of a person. Under s.7, parents have the right to raise their child in the way they see fit.  By disclosing the information from Mr. and Mrs. Zee, Bulma’s parents were violated of their right to liberty – to make fundamental choices regarding how to raise one’s child (Children’s Aid Society of Metropolitan Toronto). Thus, there has been a deprivation of liberty. However, it must also pass the principles of fundamental justice test. 
The next issue is whether it violates the principles of fundamental justice. A law violates this principle when it is arbitrary, overbroad, or grossly disproportionate in relation to its purpose (Carter). The first step is to determine the TDSB’s objectives. It is to protect the child’s right to life and bodily security. The TDSB’s objective is also to protect children from physical and emotional abuse from parents who are not supportive of their gender identity. First, Bulma is only 9. She is still under her parent’s guardianship, so decisions regarding life are determined with her parents. So though she does have a right to life, it is arbitrary because she is only 9 years old and under the responsibility of her parents. For example, how does a 5 year old’s desire not to tell their parents about something correlate to harm-prevention? Regarding the harms a child may face, it is not arbitrary, because there is a real risk that a child may face abuse.  However, the law is overbroad (catches people outside of this class) for 2 reasons. First, not all parents will be abusive towards their child if they are transgender. An in-depth assessment must be made to determine whether parents will be abusive. It cannot just be a mere disdain and disapproval of parents, but a torment and physical abuse that the child is likely to face.  Second, Bulma is again, only 9 years old. In A.C. v. Manitoba, A.C. was 14 years old. The court denied her religious conviction not to receive a blood transfusion even though she could prove that her decision was voluntary and independent because of her age and the possibility that she could change her mind in the future. In this case, Bulma, who is only 9, probably cannot guarantee that she has fully understood all the consequences regarding her choice in gender identity. Children at a young age are easily influenced by the world around them. Furthermore, they have child-like minds, minds that do not fully correspond to reality. A little girl may like to pretend she is a horse and gallop and play games where she pretends to be a horse, but if she suddenly were to tell her teacher that she wanted to be a horse and started galloping on all fours, not doing any homework, and eating grass, and sniffing others’ backsides, the teacher would be irresponsible to not tell the parents of her behavior. Even though the little girl may face some disciplinary action, it is not because the parents hate her and want the worst for her. They want what is best for her.  In Re: s.293, it was recognized that the presence of parents in a child’s life is essential, which is why polygamy inhibited this. Therefore, in most cases, the best interest of the child is found when a child is in close relation to their parents. Thus, the TDSB guidelines are overbroad because it captures a large number of parents who want what is best for their child and because Bulma is only 9 years old. Thus, it infringes on Charter s.7 and an Oakes test is unnecessary.
	
	




Q1: This is an impressive answer. You adeptly described and applied the Meiorin test, the Amselem test, the Oakes test, the Whatcott test, the Moore test, etc. More impressively, you attempted to analogize Mr. Roshi's case to the cases we studied in class. I did not agree with your reasoning at every turn. In particular, I found your application of the Moore and Whatcott tests unconvincing. Nevertheless, I am thoroughly impressed by what you were able to produce under significant time constraints. Bravo!
48 / 50.
Q2: Another excellent answer. However, I think you underestimate the effect that being misgendered, even by a single teacher, can have. It could subject Vegeta to a risk of depression, anxiety, or suicide. Furthermore, it could encourage incidents of harassment of discrimination by other students or staff. 
47 / 50
Q3: I enjoyed reading your in-depth analysis on the issue of overbreadth. 
48 / 50