Birth of the Church 						NAME: Theodore Chiu
 How does the incarnation of Christ divide human history, spiritually and practically?
 The incarnation of Christ divides human history spiritually because without Christ, everyone was ‘in the same boat,’ trying to fill a chasm in their life. Practically, it separated different people groups – both in the different divides of religion, as well as different denominations in Christianity. 
2.  What Jewish holiday were Jesus’ disciples observing when the church was born? What does this holiday commemorate and why is this significant?
 Jesus’ disciples were observing Pentecost? when the church was born. Shavuot? Shavuot celebrates God giving the people the 10 Commandments. It is significant because here, God is giving the Holy Spirit, along with the power the Holy Spirit entails. 
3.  Why was it timely that the church’s birthday fell on this day?
 It was timely that the church’s birthday fell on this day because it is 7 weeks after Passover? 
4.  Approximately how many people did the Church start with?
 The church started with approximately 120 people. 
5.  Though it would have been easier to remain in the city of Jerusalem, what forced the early Christians to scatter and thus obey Jesus’ command to be His witnesses to the ends of the earth?
 Acts 1:7b states, “You will be my witnesses….to the ends of the earth.” Jesus did not want people to just stay in Jerusalem, but He wanted people to spread His message to all people. 
6.  Explain why the Roman emperor Nero initiated the first wave of persecution against the Christians.
 Nero initiated the first wave of persecution against the Christians because he was suspected to have burned the 10/14 cities so that he could rebuild it even more splendidly. He used Chrsitians as the scapegoat of the fire.                                                       	
7.  What is the Edict of Toleration, and what year was it implemented?
 In 311, the Edict of Toleration ended state-sponsored persecution. 
8.  What is the Edict of Milan and what year was it implemented?
 In 313, the Edict of Milan issued that Christianity was an authorized religion. 
9.  In what ways was the Edict of Toleration a positive event for the early church?  In what ways was it a negative event for the church?       	
 It was positive because Chrsiatns were not being persecuted/ physically harmed. It’s smooth sailing may have inhibited the faith and trust that would have been developed with persecution. 
10. In what ways was the Edict of Milan a positive event for the early church?  In what ways was it a negative event for the church?  
`    It was a positive event because Christinas could worship in public and talk about their faith. However, it may have been negative because it weakened a Christians dependency on Christ.  