Little Yellow Riding Hood
By Theodore Chiu

There once was a little girl. She had brown eyes, black hair, and small ears. Everyday she would go on a walk in the city. And everyday, she wore the same yellow raincoat. The raincoat was a gift from her grandmother, and it was recognizable from 1000 miles away. The raincoat had the most magnificent hood. To begin with, it was a bright, lemon yellow colour. Second, it had a beautiful layer of shine to it, so that when the sun hit the yellow hood, it was as if there was a halo of light illuminating from her head. For this, she was known as Little Yellow Riding Hood. Others just called her Yellow. 
	Little Yellow Riding-Hood lived with her mother in the city. Adjacent to the city, there was a range of mountains and forests. Yellow’s grandmother lived up high in the mountaintops, where eagles nested and peacocks prowled. Yellow’s grandmother loved Yellow abundantly. Yellow only knew of the raincoat her grandmother had given her, but each week there would be a mysterious pigeon that carried a kind letter and a small gift. Yellow suspected it was from her grandmother, but she did not know for sure. Furthermore, she never really cared. Often, there would be a pinecone or a feather or a stone attached to the letter, and Yellow would place these items off to the side, forgetting them in a matter of seconds. 
There was a tale that had gone around both in the city and mountain sides that traveled like a gentle wind. Some would feel the wind, while others would not feel anything. The tale went a little like this:

There was an old wolf that lurked along the edge of the mountains and city. When it saw someone lonely, the wolf would prowl and wander around the person for a period of time. Oftentimes, the victim was an elderly man or woman. After a while, when it was sure that no one would come, it would snatch up the person. 

	For Yellow, this story was gibberish and pure nonsense. However, Yellow’s mother held firm to this belief. 
	One day, Yellow’s mother woke up early. She cooked and cooked and cooked for four hours. She cooked pork and leek dumplings, pork bone soup, stir-fry beef and broccoli, and sweet and vinegary ribs. After she finished cooking, she called Yellow and asked if she could deliver the food up the mountain to her grandma. Yellow declined because she said she needed to go out and do something else. Her mother had no time to deliver the food, for she had to work. Yellow ended up eating the food instead. The next week, Yellow’s mother did the same thing. She got up early in the morning, cooked a delicious meal, and asked Yellow to deliver the food. Yellow declined again. This time she declined because she said she too was busy; she had homework and was going to hang out with some friends from school. The same thing happened for a couple more weeks. Everytime, her mother tried to convince Yellow. 
Her mother would say things like, “You never know when the Wolves will get to her. You never know how much time is left. You don’t even know all the things she has done for you!”
Yellow would simply reply, “Mother, don’t believe in silly stories like those!”
Finally, on one Sunday morning, Yellow found herself bored. She had nothing to do. So, when her mother called her again to deliver food to her grandma on the mountain, she agreed. However, when she left the house, she did not go straight to the mountain. She stopped, bought some food, sat down on a chair, and enjoyed a small meal. Finally, as the sky was getting dark, she got up from her seat and crossed the border of the city and journeyed into the mountains. All this time, there was a gentle wind blowing against her. Yet, she did not feel anything. 
By the time she had nearly reached the top of the mountain, the sun had almost finished burning the day. The sky was dark, a couple stars dotted the sky. However, because of her grandmother’s gift – the yellow raincoat – her path was continuously illuminated. At last, the cedar cabin that sat at the edge of the cliff was in sight. She arrived at the cabin and knocked on the door. There was no response. Then, she noticed that the door was slightly ajar. 
“Grandma, I am here. I am coming in!” shouted Yellow.
There was no response, but Yellow continued to walk further into the cabin. She looked to the left over to the living room. She looked to the right, where the kitchen was. Then, she skipped over to the bedroom door. 
“Grandma, I am here. I’m sorry it’s taken me so long.”
As Yellow pushed the door open, she saw her grandmother lying in bed – still like a shriveled wallflower. Her grandmother’s face of longing stood out to Yellow the most. 
Yellow cried urgently, “Grandma, what is wrong? I am here. I am here.” 
She quickly approached the bed and shook her grandmother. 
“I am sorry I am late. Please forgive me. Oh, Grandma! Oh, Grandma! What great things you have done for me! What great love you have shown me! What great gifts you have given to me! The raincoat! The pinecones and feathers! The small pebbles! Yet, I have despised it all! Oh, please forgive me. Oh, please wake up! I will make sure no one ever gets devoured by the Wolves. I promise I will be there first. I will teach it to my children and my children’s children.”

Then, Little Yellow Riding-Hood felt a gentle wind.


THE END







Moral: “Little Yellow Riding-Hood” is a fractured fairytale based off of “Little Red Riding-Hood.” The moral of “Little Red Riding-Hood” is a warning for young ‘misses’ to be cautious of dangerous men and to guard their virginity. “Little Yellow Riding-Hood” provides a different moral. Yellow lives in the city, and her grandmother lives in the mountaintops. Due to western influence, she is set into an individualistic ideology, where she always puts herself first. Additionally, in this society, grandparents and elders are neglected. Yellow does not care about her grandmother. There is a separation of understanding and communication between grandchildren and grandparents. There is also a gentle wind that is mentioned in this story. This wind represents the responsibility of a child – to love and care for their parents and grandparents. In history, there is a larger influence, especially in Eastern cultures, of a united family. Yellow’s mother knows her duty and is always cooking for her mother (Yellow’s grandmother), but Yellow never feels this ‘wind’ or responsibility until the end of the story. Many children in modern culture are very similar to Yellow. They simply do not care about their grandparents. In this fractured fairytale, the Wolf is not a real character, but the inevitable villain that all people face: loneliness, neglect, time, and death. The Wolf is specifically the ‘villain’ that comes and takes neglected individuals of the older generation away, ones who have been forgotten by their children and grandchildren. The Wolf can come at any time, and often, this leaves the younger generation in a sudden stage of regret. They ask themselves, “Why didn’t I spend more time with my grandparents? Why do I know so little about my grandmother? Why didn’t I cherish them more? Why didn’t I talk to my grandfather just a little more? Why didn’t I love my grandparents?” Thus, the moral of the story is to decrease yourself and to spend time with your grandparents before the Wolf comes and takes them away. 









