9/23/23
MetaJournal: Reflection for Socratic Seminar 2

What was the best point made during the seminar?

I think the best point I made during the seminar was pointing out how Tagala’s focus in Seven Fallen Feathers is the blame but not the solution. 

What ideas did you agree or disagree with?

I agreed that the Indigenous people are suffering and colonialism and residential schools are part of the reason. However, colonialism and residential schools are not the only reason Indigenous communities are in the slumber they are. Furthermore, the government giving money to these Communities will not be sustainable; government funding will not solve these issues. Infrastructure, Indigenous communities joining together with a single goal and means to the goal, education systems and opportunities, and properly trained people to deal with mental health are needed to solve these issues. This is what I think right now, but I have a feeling it might change/modify/reword. 

What parts of the discussion did you find the most interesting? In what parts were you least engaged?

	I found more controversial points and questions the most interesting, which included talking about victim mentality and fallacies. I was least engaged when the same things were said about alcoholism and substance abuse and poor police operations.

What questions were left unanswered?

It seemed Marayanne was Christian because she had the Lord’s prayer on her wall. If Indigenous people were Christian, and ‘Christian’ residential schools were so bad, what does this infer? 

Added just now better phrased: Why would an Indigenous person be Christian when knowing about the horrors of residential schools that were supposedly Christian?

What did you contribute to the discussion?

	I contributed points about fallacies, victim mentality in SFF, Tagala’s focus on the blame and not the solution, and questions about what to infer if there were Indigenous Christians during a time when people believed “Christian” residential schools were such a horror. 

What evidence did you see of people actively listening and building on others’ ideas? 

People were responding to each other’s points. Eye contact and nodding were also present. People were asking questions to each others points and referring back to previous points by stating their name.

What would you like to do differently as a participant the next time you are in a seminar?

I would like to prepare even more. I want to look for my fallacies and think more critically about why Tagala wrote the way she did, and if it leads the reader to infer facts that are not true. I also want to practice being able to speak without having to refer to my notes. I want to prepare more critical thinking questions.I would like to do more research from articles that are referred to in the back of SFF. 


What is your overall evaluation of the seminar? What did the class do well? What needs improvement?

	I thought there was a lot of participation in the seminar. I thought there was still too much agreement on the same topics. The class did well in preparing quotations and research articles (bridgers). I still think that the seminar can be a lot more focused on the “why” and application to daily life. It was a little shallow still, but a lot more engaging than the first seminar. Instead of asking “what is Talaga trying to say”, maybe ask, “Is what Tagala trying to say the truth?”


9/14/23
MetaJournal: Reflection for Socratic Seminar 1

What did you learn from your peers during the seminar? How was the seminar overall? What did the class do well?

Though I went to a classical school for many years, where the whole English class was essentially a “Socratic seminar,” the discussions in this class were more formal. I enjoyed having to do research, find textual evidence, and collaborate with my Lit Circle. I learned a lot from my peers, especially those in my Lit Circle. Freddy had strong points, which he supported with many supporting quotations. He allowed people to have the time to go to the page number, and he read out the quotation, which made his argument very strong. Daniel was also a great leader. He checked in with our whole Lit Circle, looking over the team’s preparation and questions. I learned from them what strong preparation is and what a well-prepared leader looks like. The class did well in maintaining the conversation throughout the whole discussion, and questions were constantly brought up. The class also provided a lot of textual evidence from SFF. Overall, the seminar was a great experience. However, I think the discussion was a little shallow. Many people, including myself,  were agreeing on the same points, which is not a bad thing, but I think there was not enough of asking “Why” and searching into the root of some issues. For example, it was repeated that kids were drinking, and the cause was residential schools or because of the big change from “country to city” life. Or maybe the issue was because they did not have enough support and were poor. But Why are they poor? Why won’t the government give proper funding? Is funding the issue? Is there a cultural value that holds them back? Does the myth hold them to this fate? Why wasn’t the all Indigenous run school successful? How does this cycle of poverty and alcoholism end? These were some questions that I thought of later and could not exactly phrase on the day. 

Self-Evaluation: How can you help improve the discussion next time? 
	
	I think I can improve the discussion by preparing even more questions and evidence for points I am trying to make. I think as a Lit Circle, we can also collaborate more and practice discussing and thinking about certain topics to be better prepared for the next Socratic Seminar. Lastly, I think I can improve by connecting SFF themes to daily life.

Copy and past the rubric below to your Journal and complete Part A as a Self-Evaluation. 

Answer these questions: What were your strengths? What are areas for improvement? What strategies can you use to help you reach your goals for improvement? 

	Alongside my team, I think I asked good, thought-provoking, and more controversial questions, though this, too, I can also improve on. I think my book notes were also strong and included a lot of details that were great for the discussion.  I think I can improve by slowing down and giving my textual evidence by reciting the quotations instead of glossing over them. I also think I could have prepared further textual evidence for root questions, like the ones mentioned in Question 1. One other thing I could have done better is: after posing a question of the author’s bias and clouded judgment, no one seemed to answer the question. Instead of leaving it, I can know for next time to follow up with the topic. I can also prepare more evidence, so that my points will be stronger. While preparing, though I had some page numbers, I did not have enough. I think I can also improve on my confidence. I was not as confident because I was not as prepared. Lastly, I can think about connecting topics in SFF to present issues to add to the discussion. 

	Some strategies I can use include: 
While writing my notes, I can include thought-provoking questions I have of the text and include it in italics next to my notes. 
In order to prepare efficiently, I can put more page numbers in my notes. 
Instead of just having topics and motifs on the left side of my notes, I can include themes and points that the author is trying to make. In brackets, I can include my view on these points. I can also put quotations to support either Talaga’s points or mine. 
Overall, spending more time in preparation will help build my confidence. Even practicing speaking out loud is another strategy I could use to prepare for next time.  
Lastly, I can research and think about how SFF affects and applies to daily life.
