The Lightning Thief  
Ch. 1-11: Think Journal

Please use textual evidence from the book as you respond to each question. We will also use these questions to discuss the book in class. Rubric is on the next page.

Describe the setting of the story. What kind of world does our main character live in? What setting changes occur as the story progresses? Explain how repurposed myths can use settings to relate to readers.

In the beginning of the story, Percy attends Yancy academy. After school is over, he goes back to New York, where his mother is. After his encounter with the Minotaur, he arrives at Camp Half Blood. When he first wakes up, he suspects he is “on the north shore of Long Island, because on this side of the house, the valley marched all the way up to the water…”(61). Percy describes the camp like this: “The landscape was dotted with buildings that looked like ancient Greek architecture – an open-air pavilion, an amphitheater, a circular arena – except that they all looked brand new, their white marble columns sparkling in the sun”(62).   There are canoes, volleyball courts, and archery ranges as well. After Percy, Annabeth, and Grover begin their quest, they arrive at “a long, low warehouse, surrounded by acres of statutary”(171). The setting is filled with cement gnomes. 

Repurposed myths can use settings to relate to readers either by sparking imagination or familiarity. Riordan uses both aspects. He is able to relate to readers by having the setting take place in a camp, a place many kids have been to. However, he sparks imagination by including satyrs, and pegasi, and ancient Greek architecture. 

What kind of person is Percy? What troubles does he have?

Percy is a twelve year old student. He has ADHD and dyslexia. However, he is a kind person. He cares for his friend Grover. When Grover gets picked on by Nancy Bobofit, his sense of justice causes him to ‘fight’ back. Percy is also short tempered. Riordan writes, “I tried to say cool…But I was so mad my mind went blank. A wave roared in my ears “ (9). Percy also loves his mother. Percy describes it like this: “My mother can make me feel good just by walking into the room” (32). 

What do you know about dyslexia and ADHD? Research at least 1 reputable source about each. Please include the links here. Based on your brief research, explain how each would affect your ability to learn in class? Function in life? What strengths are unique to each? What challenges?

I know that dyslexia affects a person’s ability to read and ADHD affects a person’s ability to focus. 
Dyslexia:
https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/dyslexia/symptoms-causes/syc-20353552#:~:text=Overview,the%20brain%20that%20process%20language.
Mayo Clinic defines dyslexia as “a learning disorder that involves difficulty reading due to problems identifying speech sounds and learning how they relate to letters and words.”
Furthermore, dyslexia is related to problems in hearing and vision. Someone suffering with dyslexia may have trouble reading, understanding instructions, responding to questions, pronouncing words, and spelling. This can greatly affect a student’s ability in the traditional  classroom because dyslexia ultimately affects communication, and communication is vital in order for a student to demonstrate his knowledge to a teacher. Although a student may have the intellectual ability in their minds, they will struggle with communicating their knowledge, whether it is writing and verbal responses. This will affect a student’s grade. Because a dyslexic individual may have trouble understanding and forming responses, it may also affect friendships. Someone with dyslexia may misunderstand another person, while another individual may find the dyslexic individual awkward because he is unable to form answers quickly. Thus, an individual with dyslexia may be very strong academically and have a great memory, but they will be challenged in communicating in both a social and academic life. 

ADHD:
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/4784-attention-deficithyperactivity-disorder-adhd
ADHD stands for attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Cleveland clinics describes children with ADHD to have “difficulty with inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity.” Individuals with ADHD struggle with paying attention, regulating their mood, and staying organized. In a classroom environment, people who have ADHD will have a hard time focusing thus will not be able to attain as much information in comparison to their peers. It will also cause individuals to have emotional outbreaks. This could affect the relationship of and ADHD individual with their friends and family. Although an ADHD individual may be creative and funny, they will have a hard time managing their emotions and focusing on school. This will also affect their grades in school and even getting a job. 

What does Percy learn about the Greek Gods when he gets to Camp Half-Blood? What is his reaction?

Percy originally does not believe in the Greek gods (69). When Percy begins to see magical things occur, like Mr. D’s goblet filling itself with red wine, Percy’s haw drops (69). When he realizes Mr. D is a god, Percy is surprised but also fearful (70-71). Percy later learns about Thalia and how demigods often unjustly suffer for thier deity parent’s mistake (114-115). He responds, “‘But that isn't fair! It wasn’t the little girl’s fault’”(114). Later, Percy is in shock when he learns that Zeus thinks he stole his lightning bolt; he even calls Zeus crazy  (136). When Percy learns that he must go on a quest because of Zeus and Poseidon, Percy responds by saying how he didn’t even do anything (137). 

What appears to be the main problem in this story? What are some other problems that need to be resolved?

The main problem appears to be for Percy to succeed in his quest to the Underworld and prevent a “full-fledged war,” which is rooted from the dispute between Zeus and Poseidon (138).

Percy also wants to save his mother. Percy also wants to learn more about his father and exactly what type of person he is. 

What feelings does Percy have about his quest to the Underworld? What does this tell us about Percy’s character?

Riordan writes describing Percy after learning of Hades and his quest to the Underworld, “A strange fire burning in my stomach. The weirdest thing was: it wasn’t fear. It was anticipation. The desire for revenge. Hades had tried to kill me three times so far, with the Fury, the Minotaur, and the hellhound. It was his fault my mother had disappeared in a flash of light. Now he was trying to frame me and my dad for a theft we hadn't committed” (144). This shows that Percy is courageous and seeks justice. However, this also shows that Percy is not someone who often forgives, but he is someone who seeks revenge. 

What challenges and trials has Percy had to face up to this point? How has each affected Percy and the other characters?

Percy has faced bullying, which stems from him suffering from dyslexia and ADHD. He has struggled in doing well academically. He is attacked by Mrs. Dodds. He has struggled by not knowing who his father is or why his father left. He struggles with having to live with his selfish step-father, Gabe. Percy struggled the most when the “monster closed his fists around my mother’s neck…dissolved before my eyes” (53). 

Each challenge has played a key role in Percy’s life. All of these things have led him to the place he is now. His mother’s death affected Percy emotionally, but it also affected the trajectory of his path and Percy taking on the quest. All of these things have also affected Percy by instilling a sense of justice within him. P

Grover is also affected by Percy’s trials. Because of Percy’s attacks, Grover is also affected by the consequences of it, causing him to not succeed in his mission, which will determine his fate. 


RUBRIC


