Children’s Literature and Film Philosopher’s Tea Party (Calling Cards)

In my book Confessions, I recount my childhood days, and I realize that as a little boy, I was not innocent! I stole. I disobeyed my parents. I was greedy and filled with vain desire. However, this is connected to one of my later ideas of Original Sin.
My idea of Original Sin – how people are born with sin – led to the pioneering of religious education at a young age, which may have indirectly affected a clearer line to be drawn between a ‘child’ and an ‘adult’ in the Middle Ages. Perhaps, it even acted as a small push towards the development of children’s literature. 
At one point in my life, I became a Manichean. We were a mystery cult that held firm to the ideas of dualism and gnosticism. While I was a Manichean, I believed God and the soul were physical things. But in Milan, while reading Platonist works, I came across the ‘immaterial’ and ‘abstract.’ Neoplatonism also inspired my thinking, leading me to believe that God is immaterial, transcendent, immutable, and not within the confines of space. 
I was a Bishop in Hippo. I believed man was composed of body and soul, and I believed the soul should rule over our desires.
I died on August 28, 430 AD, while the Vandals (Germanic people) invaded Hippo. 

What do you do for work?
I’ve worked in different field and places. At one point, I was a rhetoric teacher in Carthage, but I found life quite unfulfilling in Carthage. So, then I moved to Milan, where I met the Bishop Ambrose. I was also the imperial professor of rhetoric. Let me tell you thing one thing about this bishop. Everyone read aloud, except for him. It was so strange. Resigned after 2 years. In 386 AD, I was converted, and I moved to Hippo (which is why I’m sometimes known as Augustine of Hippo, modern Algeria). I found Christianity more literary than I expected. I got baptized by St. Ambrose in 387 AD, and I worked as a Bishop in Hippo. I was a theologian, a writer, a preacher, and a master of rhetoric. 
Where are you from? Where do you live?
Born in Tagaste, Numidia in Africa. However, it was a Roman community.
What do you do for fun?
Read and go to Carthage (big city compared to Hippo) for ‘ecclesiastical (church) business.’
What are you known for?
What are you most proud of? Your legacy?
I think two of my books have had a lasting impact on the world: Confessions (a spiritual self-examination) and The City of God (where I use philosophy to defend Christianity).
What do you think about childhood?
What scores you or makes you upset?
I did not like the Greek classics very much as a child, while Latin I loved. 
How did you die? 
Illness in 430 AD, when Hippo was being invaded. 



































NOTES:
Stanford
Like most ancient philosophers, Augustine thinks that the human being is a compound of body and soul and that, within this compound, the soul—conceived as both the life-giving element and the center of consciousness, perception and thought—is, or ought to be, the ruling part. The rational soul should control the sensual desires and passions; it can become wise if it turns to God, who is at the same time the Supreme Being and the Supreme Good. In his Manichean phase, he conceived of both God and the soul as material entities, the soul being in fact a portion of God that had fallen into the corporeal world where it remained a foreigner, even to its own body (De duabus animabus 1; Confessiones 8.22). After his Platonist readings in Milan had provided him with the adequate philosophical means to think about immaterial, non-spatial reality (Confessiones 7.1–2; 7.16), he replaced this view, which he later represents as a rather crude dualism, with an ontological hierarchy in which the soul, which is mutable in time but immutable in space, occupies a middle position between God, who is totally unchangeable immaterial being (cf. MacDonald 2014), and bodies, which are subject to temporal and spatial change

Medieval History (Innova)
Things are either for pleasure or for use. It is incorrect to use something meant for the other. 
Phenomenological: your construct of and object with the 5 sense, experience, reasons, no noumenal knowledge, only contact with the noumenal. Words. Noumenal: the real, literal object
A word is a representation of a thing. Word is not the thing, only symbolizes it. Socrates said that an aviary of birds is like thoughts. Birds fly around, sometimes you’ll focus on one. 
According to Augustine, Christ as the Word is His utterance of Himself to Himself. Christ is God’s Word for Himself when God refers to Himself. Hypostatic Union: The only time when the Word is the noumenal, Jesus. 
Confessions
As a boy, then, I had already heard of an eternal life, promised us through the humility of the Lord our God stooping to our pride; and even from the womb of my mother, who greatly hoped in Thee, I was sealed with the mark of His cross and salted with His salt.

with innumerable lies deceiving my tutor, my masters, my parents, from love of play, eagerness to see vain shows and restlessness to imitate them! Thefts also I committed, from my parents' cellar and table, enslaved by greediness, or that I might have to give to boys, who sold me their play, which all the while they liked no less than I. In this play, too, I often sought unfair conquests, conquered myself meanwhile by vain desire of preeminence. And what could I so ill endure, or, when I detected it, upbraided I so fiercely, as that I was doing to others? and for which if, detected, I was upbraided, I chose rather to quarrel than to yield. And is this the innocence of boyhood? Not so, Lord, not so; I cry Thy mercy, my God.


St. Augustine (350 AD-430 AD): 
https://www.britannica.com/biography/Saint-Augustine
Born in Tagaste (Roman community), Africa. 
Respectable parents → acquire first-class education. 
Studied then taught rhetoric in Carthage, then rhetoric at Milan, then back to Carthage, eventually at the church.
Writings and sermons of high theological level but still heavy impact to the common, less-educated person. 
Made a presbyter (roughly a priest) at Hippo in 391. 
Was part of Manichaean cult in teenage years, but later wrote against this belief that God was good but not omnipotent to prevent evil. 

https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/augustine/
“While gratuitous election is, apart from being consoling, comparatively easily squared with the axioms of divine benevolence, justice and omnipotence, its corollary, the equally gratuitous reprobation and damnation of Esau, is a serious philosophical problem (ib. 1.2.8). If it is not to violate the principle of God’s justice, it obliges us to assume some kind of evil in Esau, which is however excluded by Paul’s explicit statement to the contrary (Romans 9:11). Augustine’s solution is his doctrine of original sin. Both Jacob and Esau have inherited Adam’s guilt that his sin has spread over all humankind—a debt that God remits for Jacob but exacts from Esau for reasons that, Augustine admits, necessarily elude human understanding but are certainly just. Since the Fall, humankind is nothing but a “lump of sin” that God might justly have damned as a whole but from which he has chosen to save some individuals and to transform them into “vessels of mercy” (ib. 1.2.16, cf. Romans 9:23).”

Confessions:
CHAPTER X 16. And yet I sinned, O Lord my God, thou ruler and creator of all natural things--but of sins only the ruler--I sinned, O Lord my God, in acting against the precepts of my parents and of those teachers. For this learning which they wished me to acquire--no matter what their motives were--I might have put to good account afterward. I disobeyed them, not because I had chosen a better way, but from a sheer love of play. I loved the vanity of victory, and I loved to have my ears tickled with lying fables, which made them itch even more ardently, and a similar curiosity glowed more and more in my eyes for the shows and sports of my elders. Yet those who put on such shows are held in such high repute that almost all desire the same for their children. They are therefore willing to have them beaten, if their childhood games keep them from the studies by which their parents desire them to grow up to be able to give such shows. Look down on these things with mercy, O Lord, and deliver us who now call upon thee; deliver those also who do not call upon thee, that they may call upon thee, and thou mayest deliver them. 

Major Ideas: 
Original sin, inherent evil, and religious education (born with sin and therefore, need religious teaching to turn from sin and to redemption). (Mrs. Choi, Sept. 19, 2024)
Practice of Biblical exegesis. 
Written works: Confessions, On Christian Doctrine, etc..

