Theodore Chiu
Oct 9, 2024

Bradbury & the Bible

Ruth and Fahrenheit 451:

	Bradbury mentions the book of Ruth from the Bible to provide a comparison between the lives of Montag and Ruth. The book of Ruth tells the story of Naomi and her widowed daughter-in-law, Ruth. Elimelech, the husband of Naomi, as well as Naomi’s two sons are dead. Naomi and Ruth return to Bethlehem; however, they are not wealthy, and Ruth must go to the fields to glean the wheat after harvesters collect the grain. One of the fields Ruth gleans on belongs to Boaz, a relative of Naomi’s husband, who shows Ruth kindness; he even tells the harvesters to purposely leave some grain for Ruth. Eventually, Boaz redeems Ruth by marrying her. In Fahrenheit 451, Montag’s society is poor in wisdom, for they have no books. However, as the novel progresses, Montag begins to become ‘redeemed.’  Bradbury mentions the book of Ruth on purpose. He is comparing the situations of Montag and Ruth. First, Montag tries to read by himself. This is like Ruth going to the fields to pick up leftover wheat by herself. Both Montag and Ruth are trying to succeed by themselves. However, they are unable to achieve much success. Next, there is the ‘redeeming’ character. In Fahrenheit 451, Faber gives guidance and teaches Montag how to think. This is like Boaz helping Ruth. Lastly, both Montag and Ruth do not have a community. Montag has realized that there is no love and relationship between him and his wife, Mildred. On the other hand, Ruth is Moabite, who travels to Bethlehem, entering a strange and foreign community for her. Additionally, Ruth’s husband has died, and her sister-in-law, who is a Moabite, has taken a different path. However, at the end of the book, both Montag and Ruth are redeemed through the help of Faber and Boaz, where they find a home. Montag finds a community, and Ruth finds a family. Thus, the connection between the book of Ruth and Bradbury’s Fahrenheit 451 is found in Montag’s and Ruth’s efforts to try to succeed by themselves, their redeemer, and their finding of a community. 
