Chapter 1: There Can’t Be Just One True Religion
1. Keller says he has often asked non-Christians, “What is your biggest problem with Christianity? What troubles you most about its beliefs or how it is practiced?” [p. 3] 
There are three things that I find troublesome with how Christianity is practiced. 
The first is the concept of ‘niceness’ that acts as a mist to genuine growth. Christians are known to be nice people. They smile at each other. When someone says something offensive, a Christian will try their best not to react with anger. The Bible says to be kind and loving and slow to speak. However, this concept of ‘niceness’ seems to be in the way of genuine conversations and disagreements. How can Christians reach the truth if all they talk about is shallow beliefs and repeat the same phrases in agreement with one another? How can one grow if they fear disagreement? Then, there is no room for discussion or growth, and the pursuit and understanding of truth becomes static. This is connected to my second point. 
I find that Christians are often unwilling to search for the truth. The greatest example of this in politics and societal issues and even the ongoing wars. Christians say, “God is in control” or “God has a purpose.” Or maybe they try to make themselves feel better by donating some money. And it just ends there. They only listen to one news source. I will admit that I have not done a lot of research myself on this topic as I write this, but from what my parents have told me and the amount of deaths I have heard happened, I am confused why so many Chrsitians are in agreement with what Israel is doing. 
Lastly, as a Chinese, I find many Christians comment on things they do not know about. They hear the words “Communist China” and automatically think that China is some Christian slaughtering dystopia. Yet, they have never been to China. Although they only know one side of the story, the side that Western media tells them, they think they know the whole truth. Keller talks about missionaries being banned, but why does he not talk about how Western countries sent missionaries in as spies? People also seem to forget the opium war, how Great Britain smuggled opium into China’s ports. Let’s say a bully came and knocked on your door and then beat you up. The next day the bully comes again. He tells you how he has come to spread a message of love. Would you open the door for him?
2. Keller agrees with the notion that religions claiming exclusivity of their beliefs are a barrier to world peace [p. 4] Do you agree with Keller? Do you find his agreement surprising? Can you understand why exclusivity can be a concern of many in our culture?
A religion can claim to be exclusive, but this in itself does not destroy peace. However, when people, in their sin, do believe to be superior to others, then it does cause division. It can create pride in Christians and lead to strife. Keller does mention that this is a slippery slope. So again, it is not an absolute that religions claiming exclusivity are a barrier to world peace. 
3. Define, as objectively and carefully as possible, the three approaches to try to deal with the divisiveness of religion: to outlaw it [p. 5-6], to condemn it [p. 7-13], and to restrict it the private sphere of life [p. 13-18]. Where have you noticed or encountered such approaches? What does Keller identify as the flaw in each approach? Do you agree they are flaws? 
The first approach is to outlaw religion, meaning to forbid the practice of the religion entirely. The second is to condemn the religion or discourage religion in a social setting. This can be expressed in multiple ways. Someone may argue that religions are equally valid. Others may say each religion is just a part of a larger truth or a piece of the puzzle. Thirdly, some may say religion is just an outcome of history and culture. Next, someone may say that it is arrogant to insist your religion is right and to try to convert others. In order to fit in, many people will fall into these traps. The last of the three approaches is to restrict it to the private sphere of life. Religious conversations should not be discussed. Religious conversations are like taboo or items that lead to arguments or something that makes people feel uncomfortable. 
I’ve encountered Keller’s third approach in family gatherings, where no one talks about religion. Some of my relatives find it uncomfortable and simply do not want to talk about it. 
Keller states that outlawing religion leads to even more conflict, but it also makes the religion stronger. I think Keller fails to see a multifaceted view in this case though. He gives the example of China “expelling missionaries.” In my opinion, Keller fails to recognize the motivations of China for doing so. However, I do agree that outlawing a religion can make it even stronger. 
The fact that all religions are essentially the same is silly. I agree with Keller. How can Christianity and Buddhism be the same when one believes in a God and one’s core is a teaching. I also agree with Keller’s response to the idea that religion is an outcome of culture and history and not truth. The person stating this statement is exempting themselves from their statement. Why is there belief not just an outcome of society and history? 
I also agree with Keller’s response to the third approach. Why are secular individuals allowed to talk about their core beliefs, such as self-realization, but then the Christians cannot talk about their beliefs?
4. “Ironically, the insistence that doctrines do not matter is really a doctrine itself” [p. 8]. What is a good, winsome way to present this truth to a skeptic without seeming arrogant or insensitive or offensive?
The best way to present this is to ask questions. Ask them: “Although you are not explicitly reciting a doctrine relating to God, aren’t you essentially presenting a doctrine with a specific view of God, that God does not matter or God does not exist?
5. Given the refutation of the “story of the blind men and the elephant” [p. 8-9], how do we make this argument while maintaining the humility appropriate to knowing we see only in part, through a glass darkly (see 1 Corinthians 13)?
The person telling the story must be able to see the whole view; they cannot be blind. They must say how everyone is blind and only sees a portion of the elephant, except for themselves. However, when Christians do talk to someone who believes in this view, they must remember that on this earth, although we are Christians, we do not see in full. Christians may know the truth of Jesus, but ultimately, we are not omniscient, and we should not become prideful. 
6. Keller says, “The reality is that we all make truth-claims of some sort and it is very hard to weigh them responsibly, but we have no alternative but to try to do so” [p. 11]; “We are all exclusive in our beliefs about religion, but in different ways” [p. 13]. How do you weigh your truth-claims? 
I weigh my truth claims by experience (what works and what does not) and evidence. In terms of believing in God, my experience is that I've felt God working in my life. But for example, if I was weighing the truth of the Bible’s validity, I would also have to look for evidence and research. I would look into scientific evidence and historical research to help me have a stronger belief in this truth.
7. Because “all of us have fundamental, unprovable faith-commitments that we think are superior to those of others,” Keller argues that we must ask, “which fundamentals will lead their believers to be the most loving and receptive to those with whom they differ?” [p. 19-20]. What “fundamentals” would apply to Christians? Why do so many Christians tend to act as if such fundamentals do not apply to them, since they are neither loving nor receptive?
The ‘fundamentals’ that apply are helping the poor and those in need, being kind to widows, and aiding orphans. It is simply being generous and kind. Christians are ultimately not perfect. This is not an excuse for sin but a reality. The root cause which causes Chrsitains to not act on these ‘fundamentals’ is their selfishness and pride. Lastly, Christians must remember that at the core of Christianity is love and self-sacrifice. When people see how Christians are loving and sacrificing themselves for others, they will realize that there must be something about Christianity that gets people to behave this way.
8. Does it shock you when Keller says that Christians should expect to find nonbelievers who are “much nicer, kinder, wiser, and better than they are”? [p. 19].
It shocks me a little bit. Christians can be kind and nice, but non-Christians can be nice, too. Not all Chrsitans are perfectly good; Christians are constantly growing. non-Christians can show kindness for a couple reasons. It could be because of a ‘universal moral law’ that exists within humans, or it could be because of a societal norm. However, Christians know that their motive for being kind and nice is to obey and love God, although they may not not always act on this belief. 
Christians can also seek wisdom from God, unlike non-believers. But ultimately all people are made in the image of God and have the ability to reason and think and make decisions in wisdom.  Lastly, it is important for Christians to remember that it is not by their morals or knowledge that they are given eternal life. 
9. Review the title of this chapter—does Keller fully answer this question, or does he primarily level the playing field for conversations with skeptics? 
The title of this chapter is There Can’t Be Just One True Religion. I think Keller is leveling the playing field for conversations for both Christians and non-Chrstians to be receptive to each other. On one hand, he is addressing beliefs non-believers might have, like how he combats the belief that each religion sees a part of the truth or how religion should not be the only ‘conversation stopper,’ such as when people talk about self-realization. On the other hand, Keller does recognize that Christianity has led to unpeaceful events, but ultimately, Keller emphasizes the undeniable impact fundamentals beliefs of Christianity can have. Keller has concluded that there can just be one religion. Religions are not all the same, nor are they all part of an ‘elephant.’ Now, Keller can talk about why Christianity is true. 

