PCA Request for Nomination Form:
Thank you for expressing a desire to be nominated for the National Book Award.

Instructions: Please complete this form in point-form, and submit it as soon as possible or by Sunday, Oct. 8. It is NOT necessary that the student intend to apply for admission to the University of Toronto. Please be brief but detailed (give examples where appropriate).
Student Name:____Theodore Chiu_______________ 
1.	How have you excelled in academic pursuits?
Recipient of the Nesbitt Woods Memorial Scholarship at PCA (highest academic average in Grade 11).
Valedictorian of the Grade 8 graduating class of Innova Academy (highest academic average). 
Recipient of the Grade 8 graduating class Excellence in Visual Arts Award at Innova Academy.
Completion of The Royal Conservatory of Music Level 8 Piano and Music Theory with First Class Honors. 
The Royal Canadian Legion Remembrance Day Contest (see below)

First Place winner of the Cursive is Cool 2019 Contest in Grade 6.  
2.	How have you demonstrated enthusiasm for intellectual exploration?
Freddy, Frank, Daniel, and I were hoping to take Philosophy this year. However, it was not on the list that came out in the spring. We wrote Mrs. Lee an email, but unfortunately the course could not be offered. At that time, we were disappointed, but Ms. Cho asked if we would be interested in a Philosophy Book Club, studying Signature in the Cell by Stephen Meyers. This offer was a group-decision to pursue the ‘enigma’ of DNA and its connection to an intelligent designer. 
Reading
Books/Literature of Study in Grade 9: On Christian Doctrine, Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Beowulf, Canterbury Tales, Everyman (morality play), Andreas (saint’s life).
Books of Study in Grade 10: The Iliad, The Odyssey, The Aeneid, Oedipus Rex, Metamorphoses, and Till We Have Faces.
Books/Stories Of Recent Leisure: The Sirens of Titan by Kurt Vonnegut, Crazy Rich Asians By Kevin Kwan, Do Hard Things by Alex and Brett Harris, High Lonesome by Joyce Carol Oates (short stories: “Upon the Sweeping Flood,” “At the Seminary,” “In the Region of Ice”) , Canadian Short Stories selected by Jane Urquhart (“The View from Castle Rock” by Alice Munro, “The Art of Cooking and Serving” by Margaret Atwood, “Lunch Conversations” by Michael Ondaatje).
Writing: Working on novels and novellas and short stories and poetry and short scripts:
Short story competitions
Amazon Youth Short Story Competition
CBC’s The First Page 
Kids Write For Kids Contest
Participation in the Waterloo Math Competition in Grade 10.
Studied Latin both in and out of school (Innova: Oxford, Home: Lively Latin).
Participation in ASCI math and public speaking contests in Grade 6. 
Studied visual arts since the age of 5 to present.
Intellectual exploration revolving around bread. Creating and experimenting to finalize a low-carb bread that is able to maintain a very similar texture to regular Artisan Bread (experimenting with all-purpose flour, almond flour, arrowroot flour, and coconut flour). This was inspired by mother’s inflammation, which was an outcome of digesting carbs. 
3.	How have you demonstrated a strong involvement in the lives of your school and community?
Community
Volunteered for over 3 years at my church (Caledon East Fellowship Baptist Church) in supporting the worship team in sound, livestream, lyrics, and training new members. 
Volunteered as an assistant for Sunday School.
Led a team of aged 6-11 year olds at Albion Hills Adventure Bible Camp as a Camp Counselor in Grade 10.
Many people have heard of the Scott Mission but are unaware that Scott Mission runs a camp (SMC) for underprivileged children and youth. The camp is located in Caledon, very close to where I live and where I attend church. I had not intended to work here, but for the last month of summer, I accepted the role as a lifeguard and an overnight camp counselor. However, the first week was nothing like what I expected. I attended Christian schools for most of life growing up. On the contrary, many of these kids had never heard of Jesus and came from rough backgrounds. I remember having the opportunity to talk to some of the kids in my cabin. There were stories of single parents raising children and stories of abuse. There was bullying, too. Eventually, a physical fight broke out in my cabin. The kids were only 9 or 10. It had escalated to the point where the director asked me if one of the kids should be sent home.  This was all so new to me, but the greatest blessing was being able to support the kids in prayer, conversations, group activities and games.  On the last night of camp, there would be a message and then a worship session. It was the most moving thing to see the kids in my cabin cry, pray together, and hug each other. The Scott Mission Camp community was like no other. 
I have had the blessing to be involved in other communities: Competitive Swimming (Orangeville Otters), Competitive Badminton (Lee’s Badminton), Chinese Martial Arts/KungFu (Taishan Martial Arts), Musical Theatre (Orangeville Music Theatre).
School
Student Council President of Innova High School in grades 9 and 10. As the Student President, one of our major areas of responsibility was S.A.L.T. (Serving and Learning Together), a high school initiative with a heavy focus on serving the school and the greater community. In this role, I was able to work with other council members, classmates, teachers, and even office staff to successfully run different events. A few examples are the Christmas Market (which fundraised over $2000 for the S.A.L.T. team), Walk Through History Day (leading games, co-writing a mini-script to be performed in front of parents, serving food), Grandparents Tea (planning serving food and drinks), organizing Scripture memory contests for house points, and garbage pick-up around the community. 
Participated in school sports (at Innova): tennis team, badminton team, cross country, track and field.
Part of the PCA Badminton Team (boys doubles).
Part of the PCA Formal Committee.
Part of the PCA Worship Team. 
PCA Mahjong Club. Mahjong has negative connotations because of its connection with gambling, but Mahjong is truly a game that encourages strategic thinking. 
Innova: Handchimes Choir, Small Ensemble, Musical Theater: Barbecue for Ben (Innova).

 
 
 
 
Submit to Google Classroom by Sunday, October 8th.