Ecumenical Councils 						NAME: Theodore Chiu

What does the term “ecumenical” mean?

Coming together. 

What were the issues of major disagreement among Christians in the early church?

Arius: not hold to full divinity of Christ. There was a time “Logos” did not exist and that Jesus was subordinate to God. Athanasius argued against. Christ determined to be co-equal and co-eternal. 

(2) Apollinarius: denied human soul in Christ. Led to basic outline of trinitarian theology. 

(3) Nestorius: Mary is mother of human side but not divine. Therefore declared Mary was Theotokos (God-bearer). But why??

(3/4) How divine and human nature could co-exist in 1 person. Nestorius: 2 natures could never be fully united in 1 person. On the other hand, Eutyches: stress unity so much humanity swallowed up by divinity. Both positions condemned. → at Chalcedon (4) 2 natures, no detriment to either , continue to exist w/o confusion or change, (combat Eutyches’ idea of merging 2 natures) division or separation (exclude Nestorius separation)... Essentially, “1 person in 2 natures.”

(6) Jesus had human will and divine will that function together in perfect harmony.  Condemned Monothelitism (believed Christ had only divine will).

(7) The place of images or icons in the life of Christian community (still Christological, but more practical/pastoral). Veneration of icons had been part of E. worship. John of Damascus: imaging of Jesus was part of incarnational theology. Conclusion to affirm the use of icons and other symbols as valid aspects of worship (not worship icons). 

What is meant by the “Christological question”?  

Is Jesus fully man, God, or both?

When and where did the First Ecumenical Council meet? Who called it?

Emperor Constantine called the First Ecumennical Council of the CHurch at Nicea in 325 → start of Nicene Creed. 

Who were two strong voices in the debate and what were their positions?

Arius did not hold to the fully divinity of Christ. He believed that there was a time where the Logos did not exist and that Jesus was subordinate to God. On the other hand, Athanasius argued that was declared to be “begotten not made” and “one in being”.  Athanasius argued that this was evidence for Christ the Son being co-equal and eternal with God the Father. 

How did the Council of Nicea answer the Christological issue? What was the result?

The Council of Nicea answered the Christological issue by concluding that Christ was fully divine and equal with God. Christ was begotten and not made. Furthermore, God is “one in being” (homoousios). 

When and where did the 2nd EC meet? Who called it?

The second EC met at Constantinople. It was called by Emperor Theodosius in 381. 

How did the First Ecumenical Council result in the need for the Second Council Ecumenical Council?

The First EC affirmed the fully divinity of Christ, which led to the need to affirm Chrsit’s full humanity. 

In addition to the Christological question, what else was addressed by the 2nd EC?

In addition to the Christological question, in the second EC, the council outlined the basic structure of the trinitarian theology by affirming the deity of the Holy Spirit. 

Where and when did the 3rd EC occur? Where and when did the 4th EC occur?

The third EC was held at Ephesus in 431. The fourth EC was held at Chalcedon in 451. 

Why were the 3rd and 4th EC's necessary? What subtle (yet important) issue did they deal with that was not directly addressed by the 1st and 2nd councils? 

The 3rd and 4th EC were important because it discussed how the 2 natures of Christ could exist in one person. The 1st EC addressed Christ’s divinity, and the 2nd addressed Christ’s humanity. However, the subtle issue was how these two natures could exist together. 

 Who did the 3rd and 4th councils oppose (include the positions of the views that were opposed)? How did they do this? i.e. What did the 3rd and 4th councils affirm?

Eutyches thought the 2 natures were merged. Nestorius thought the 2 natures could never be fully united in 1 person. The result: the 2 natures of Christ are w/o detriment to their full characteristics and exist w/o “confusion or change” (address Eutyches’ idea of the unity of Christ that the human nature is irrelevant/’swallowed up’) and “division and separation”(address Nestorius’ idea that 2 natures could never be united in 1 person)..

What is Monothelitism and what was the 6th council's stance on this view?

Monothelitism is a movement that believed Christ only had a divine will. The 6th EC addressed this issued by concluding that Jesus possessed both a human will and a divine will that function together in perfect moral harmony. This deduction stemmed from the affirmation of Chalcedon that Christ was 2 natures in 1. 
 
Where and when did the 7th EC meet? Who called it?

The seventh EC was called by Byzantine Empress Irene in 787 in Nicea. 

What was the main issue at hand in the 7th EC, what were the opposing views and who were they held by? How was the issue resolved?

The issue was whether images/icons belonged in the Christina community and worship. Veneration of icons had been a part of E. worship. John of Damascus defended the use of icons that imaging Jesus was part of an incarnational theology. Two emperors disagreed. The council concluded to affirm the use of icons and other symbols as a valid aspect of Christina worship. 

When and how the NT go on record as consisting of 27 books? 

Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, in 367 wrote a list of 27 books of NT.  Stemmed from Marcion, who argue OT should be thrown out because God of OT was very different from God presented by Jesus. 

What three criteria helped the Church Fathers discover which books were to be included in the cannon of Holy Scripture?

Written by an apostle or close associate
In accord with the rest of biblical revelation
Passed the test of experience (whereby through long use the Christian community had come to a consensus regarding divine inspiration). How so??

Summarize (as clearly and succinctly as possible) what the seven ecumenical councils concluded about the nature and person of Jesus Christ.

Nicea: Declared that Chrsit is fully divine.
Constantinople: Declared that Christ is fully human.
Ephesus: Declared that Christ is a unified person and that Mary is Theotokos (God-bearer).
Chalcedon: Declared that Chrsit is “two natures (divine and human) in one person”.
Constantinople: Reaffirmed Chalceon and condemned “the Three Chapters”.
Constantinople: Declared that Christ possessed both a human will and a divine will that function together in perfect moral harmony.
Nicea: Icons and other symbols are acceptable aids to worship and devotion. 

Does studying the Ecumenical Councils change your view on the benefits or drawbacks of the Edict of Toleration and the Edict of Milan?

No, but I think that without the Edict of Toleration and Milan, the clarity and discussion could not have occurred to the level it did. 
