FREEDOM OF RELIGION ASSIGNMENT
T.Chiu
Trinity Western University  v. College of Teachers [2001] SCR 772
Factual Summary
Trinity Western University (“TWU”) is a private Christian university associated with the Evangelical Free Church of Canada in Langley, British Columbia (Trinity Western University v. College of Teachers [“Teachers”], 2001, para. 1). The school’s mission is to develop and train students to be Christian leaders that reflect the attributes of Christ, take part in the Great Commission as disciples of Christ, and serve God and others (Teachers, 2001, para. 10). Trinity Western University started a teacher’s education program in 1985 (Teachers, 2001, para. 2). It is a five year course, where four years are spent at TWU and the last year is spent at Simon Fraser University, a public university (Teachers, 2001, para. 2).  In 1987, TWU applied to have full responsibility for the program (Teachers, 2001, para. 2). The British Columbia College of Teachers (BCCT) was created in the same year; they were in charge of considering whether TWU could assume full control of their baccalaureate in education (Teachers, 2001, para. 2). However, in order to attend TWU, students and staff would have to sign a document titled “Community Standards” (Teachers, 2001, para. 3). That document states that students must refrain from homosexual behaviour because it is biblically condemned (Teachers, 2001, para. 4).  
The British Columbia College of Teachers rejected TWU’s application because, “TWU did not meet the criteria stated in the BCCT bylaws and policies; and approval would not be in the public interest because of discriminatory practices of the institution'' (Teachers, 2001, para. 5). In 1997, TWU appealed the BCCT’s decision to the B.C. Supreme Court. Davies, J., ruled for TWU on the ground that the BCCT had no jurisdiction to consider matters of diversity and religion, and instead was limited to assessing the academic qualifications of TWU’s proposed program (Teachers, 2001, para. 7). In 1998, the BC Court of Appeal affirmed the decision below (Teachers, 2001, para. 7). Finally, the BCCT appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada.  In the end, BCCT’s appeal was dismissed, and the court concluded that each party was responsible for their cost  (Teachers, 2001, para. 46).
Legal Summary
Did BCCT have jurisdiction to consider discriminatory practices?
The court decided “that the BCCT had jurisdiction to consider discriminatory practices” (Teachers, 2001, para. 14). The BCCT, under s. 4 of the Teaching Profession Act, has jurisdiction to make decisions based on the standards of education and competence of teachers and staff, with all these decisions being made in the interest of the public (Teachers, 2001, para. 11).  The court concluded that, because teachers have such a large influence on students, and because children should not only be learning book knowledge, it served the public interest for the BCCT to make decisions related to civic virtue (Teachers, 2001, para. 13). The court agreed that making decisions regarding discriminatory practices is classified as a decision made in public interest and that education programs must be offered in a manner that “reflects human rights values” and diversity, including sexual diversity (Teachers, 2001, para. 11). 
Must the court defer to BCCT?
A court usually defers to a government agency’s decision, unless they find the decision to be unreasonable or out of the agency’s range of expertise (Teachers, 2001, para. 17). In this case, BCCT made decisions regarding TWU’s religious freedom (Teachers, 2001, para. 17). The court wrote, “its expertise does not qualify it to interpret the scope of human rights nor to reconcile competing rights;” the BCCT’s expertise is in education (Teachers, 2001, para. 17). The court further wrote that making decisions on good character does not allow the BCCT to make decisions based on “religious belief, freedom of association and the right to equality generally” (Teachers, 2001, para. 17). 
Did this decision infringe on TWU’s religious freedom and if so, was it reasonable?
	Under s. 2(a) of the Charter, all people are guaranteed the freedom of conscience and religion (Teachers, 2001, para. 28). British Columbia’s human rights legislation also permits religious organizations the ability to discriminate and exclude those who are not of their religion (Teachers, 2001, para. 28). TWU is a Christian university, and their mission is to prepare students to be disciples of Christ (Teachers, 2001, paras. 1, 10). The school is designed for Christians, and TWU is allowed to prefer Christians because it is a private, religious organization (Teachers, 2001, para. 25). The BCCT’s decision prevents TWU from developing a religious community under their religious doctrine and preferring Christians, which they are permitted under law to do (Teachers, 2001, para. 25). Section 41 in the Human Rights Code states that religious institutions are not considered to be at fault when they prefer the followers of that religion over others, like non-Christians in this case (Teachers, 2001, para. 35). So, even though people who identify as gay and lesbian are not likely to feel included and inclined to apply to TWU, the court found it to be reasonable because of TWU’s specific, Biblical mission, which is most likely in conflict with those who identify as homosexual (Teachers, 2001, para. 34).
	BCCT claimed that their decision to deny TWU’s teacher’s college was reasonable because it prevented discrimination against homosexual people (Teachers, 2001, para. 5). The BCCT stated that the evidence of TWU’s discriminatory actions was found in their internal documents – that classifying homosexuality as a sin is seen as intolerance (Teachers, 2001, para. 21). BCCT believed TWU graduates would be discriminatory and would “have a detrimental effect on the learning environment in public schools" (Teachers, 2001, para. 32). First, it is important to note that in TWU’s “Core Values and Community Standards,” students are encouraged to obey Jesus commands and love one another (Teachers, 2001, para. 10). This means that in TWU’s values, students and staff should show respect to all people, even people who have contrary beliefs, like homosexual individuals (Teachers, 2001, para. 10).  The evidence that BCCT proposed that teachers would be discriminatory was considered speculative because being a Christian or agreeing with the Covenant does not necessitate or even support the idea of being discriminatory and intolerant towards sexual behaviour in public schools (Teachers, 2001, paras. 19, 33). Furthermore, there was no evidence from BCCT regarding a pattern of TWU graduates that were discriminatory (Teachers, 2001, para. 38). BCCT argued that because TWU students had to attend Simon Fraser University, there was no discrimination to be found (Teachers, 2001, para. 38). However, there is no rational connection that a student neck-deep in Christian belief would suddenly have a huge change from going to a public university for one year (Teachers, 2001, para. 38). The court wrote, “There is no evidence before this Court that anyone has been denied admission because of refusal to sign the document or was expelled because of non-adherence to it” (Teachers, 2001, para. 22). In sum, there is no concrete or solid evidence that teachers who graduate from the TWU will be discriminatory based on the Community Standards (Teachers, 2001, para. 35-36). Therefore, BCCT’s decision was seen as unreasonable, and the court concluded that each party was responsible for their cost  (Teachers, 2001, para. 46).

Law Society of British Columbia v. Trinity Western University, [2018] 2 SCR 293.
Factual Summary
	Trinity Western University (TWU) is a privately funded evangelical Christian University located in Langley, British Columbia [“Law Society”], 2018, para.1, 4). TWU’s goal is to provide students with an education that is rooted in Christ and develop Christian leaders that participate in the Great Commission (Law Society, 2018, para. 5). TWU also believes in the authority of the Bible, and in the Bible, mankind is commanded to withhold themselves from sexual impurity outside of a marriage between a man and woman (Law Society, 2018, para. 6). TWU wanted to start a law school, but to attend the school, students and faculty must sign a Covenant, prohibiting sexual activity that is not between a married man and woman (Law Society, 2018, para. 1). Furthermore, TWU would not compromise on the Covenant, which was the only point of contention (Law Society, 2018, para. 85).
The Law Society of British Columbia (LSBC), “the regulator of the legal profession in British Columbia,” rejected TWU’s proposal, but TWU argued that the decision went against their right to freedom of religion (Law Society, 2018, para. 2, 10). Though TWU won in the Court of Appeal, the Supreme Court found that the LSBC’s decision was reasonable and that the limitation on TWU’s religious freedom was proportionally balanced with the benefits of LSBC’s statutory mandate (Law Society, 2018, para. 3, 83, 105). It was concluded: “The resolution of the LSBC to declare that TWU’s proposed law school not be approved is restored” (Law Society, 2018, para. 106).
Legal Summary
Did the LSBC have jurisdiction? Did the decision serve public interest?
The court decided that it was within the LSBC’s jurisdiction to consider factors of admission into the legal profession in British Columbia, not related to academic qualification, if it maintained “the overarching objective of protecting the public interest”(Law Society, 2018, para. 29-31). TWU’s argument, that the LSBC should only consider the academic competence of students, was denied by the court (Law Society, 2018, para. 30). The court agreed that the TWU Covenant created an “inequitable admissions policy” (Law Society, 2018, para. 47). The courts favoured with the LSBC, that the mandatory Covenant made the entry to the TWU law school unequal, which would further place a barrier to those of the LGBTQ community who would seek to enter into a legal profession (Law Society, 2018, para. 39). LSBC’s decision served the public interest because it promoted diversity in the legal profession as well as increased the representation and administration of justice for those who identified as LGBTQ (Law Society, 2018, para. 39). The court decided that TWU was indirectly prohibiting entrance into their proposed law school purely based on personal characteristics (Law Society, 2018, para. 41). Furthermore, a diverse bar, which was contrary to TWU’s proposed law school, would be more equipped to serve the needs of a diverse public (Law Society, 2018, para. 43). 
The court recognized that the LSBC’s decision was promoting equality in the legal profession because though TWU stated they were open to all people attending their school, most people who are part of the LGBTQ community would not apply due to the mandatory Covenant (Law Society, 2018, para. 93). Though there were many other schools LGBTQ people could apply to, the court found LGBTQ citizens to be at an unfair advantage because those who are willing to sign the Covenant would get a potential 60 more chances, and essentially an entire law school was being closed off to LGBTQ citizens (Law Society, 2018, paras. 94-95). Therefore, the LSBC’s decision served the public interest. 
Did the benefits of the LSBC’s decision outweigh the harms?
Next, the court considered the issue of balanced proportionality. The court in Law Society, to determine whether the LSBC’s decision was reasonable, used the Dore and Loyola framework (Law Society, 2001, paras. 78-79). The court concluded that TWU’s religious freedoms were being infringed upon (Law Society, 2018, para. 61). Section 2(a) is infringed upon when the individual or group has a sincere belief that has a nexus with religion and when their ability to act on their belief is affected in a non-trivial manner (Law Society, 2018, para. 63). TWU was a religious organization that held sincere and well known beliefs, and TWU’s conduct was being interfered with in a substantial manner, for Christians were not able to engage in their preferred environment (Law Society, 2018, paras. 70, 75, 87). The main issue the court had to consider was whether the LSBC’s limitation “reflected a proportionate balance of the Charter protection and the statutory objectives” (Law Society, 2018, para. 28). The LSBC’s statutory objective is “to uphold and protect the public interest in the administration of justice” (Law Society, 2018, para. 33). In order for a decision to be considered reasonable, the decision must proportionally balance the rights under the Charter and the statutory mandate (Law Society, 2018, para. 79). TWU’s Charter rights must be affected in the least amount reasonably possible (Law Society, 2018, para. 80). The court concluded that if LSBC were to approve TWU’s law school with the Covenant, Charter rights would be given more weight than the statutory mandate because parts of the public, primarily homosexuals, would be excluded from the school (Law Society, 2018, para. 84). Though the court recognized that the limitation caused the spiritual growth of students who wanted to attend TWU to be hindered, they decided that the decision was minimally invasive (Law Society, 2018, paras. 75, 85). LSBC only denied the mandatory Covenant; they did not deny the school because it was a Christian school (Law Society, 2018, para. 85). The court stated that the limitation did not affect students who desired to follow the Covenant (Law Society, 2018, para. 86). Students could still decide to follow Covenant rules without the Covenant existing. The court reasoned that the Covenant was not a mandatory component of being an evangelical Christian; it only potentially affected students from studying in their preferred environment, where all students followed the Covenant (Law Society, 2018, para. 87). 
The benefits the court gave was that it benefitted and protected the public because it significantly decreased the risk that LGBTQ people would face from attending TWU’s law school (Law Society, 2018, para. 96). The court stated that it was harmful for a homosexual to deny and sacrifice a part of their identity (Law Society, 2018, para. 96). The court wrote, “Being required by someone else’s religious beliefs to behave contrary to one’s sexual identity is degrading and disrespectful” (Law Society, 2018, para. 101).It was also considered harmful if the homosexual decided to ignore the Covenant, because then they would face disciplinary action (Law Society, 2018, para. 96). TWU argued that LGBTQ students would not be harmed because as part of their Christian mission, students and faculty are supposed to treat each other with respect and love, regardless of differences (Law Society, 2018, para. 97). The court did not believe that it was possible to condemn and not discriminate against the same practice, sexual behaviour outside of a marriage between a man and woman (Law Society, 2018, para. 97). LSBC’s decision benefited the public because it promoted diversity in the legal profession as well as increased the representation and administration of justice for those who identified as LGBTQ (Law Society, 2018, para. 39) .It was concluded that the LSBC’s decision was of minor invasiveness, because Chrsitians were not being denied the right to practice their religion (Law Society, 2018, para. 102). 
All these reasons served the public interest. Because LGBTQ individuals would have less options to attend law school and because “prospective TWU law students effectively admit[ted] that they [would] have much less at stake than claimants in many other case that have come before this Court”, the court reasoned it to be a case of inequality in education (Law Society, 2018, paras. 90, 95). Therefore, the court concluded that the LSBC’s decision was reasonable and that it served the public interest because it promoted equality in the legal profession as well as prevented harm towards potential LGBTQ law students (Law Society, 2018, paras. 40, 105). 

Does the Law Society overturn Teachers, or are the two cases distinguishable?
	The two cases are distinguishable. Some may argue that Law Society overturns Teachers because they are essentially the same case: a government agency prohibiting the start of a school with a required Covenant not permitting homosexual behaviour. However, there are three factual differences between the cases: the differences between the BCCT and the LSBC, the fact that one was a teacher’s program related to their undergrad and the other a postgraduate law school, and evidence of discrimination.  
Though the BCCT and LSBC are both government agencies that have the same purpose, to serve the public, they have different areas of expertise. The BCCT did not have the expertise to consider and interpret matters of human rights because their expertise was in education and determining whether a teacher would be academically qualified and of good character (Teachers, 2018, para. 17). Regarding the BCCT’s ability to judge good character, the court wrote, “It cannot be seriously argued that the determination of good character, which is an individual matter, is sufficient to expand the jurisdiction of the BCCT to the evaluation of religious belief, freedom of association and the right to equality generally (Teachers, 2001, para. 17). Therefore, the court did not owe deference to the BCCT (Teachers, 2001, para.17). On the other hand, the LSBC has the authority to regulate the practice of law and preserve and protect the rights and freedoms of all people (Law Society, 2018, para. 33). The LSBC determines the entrance and denial into the British Columbian bar (Law Society, 2001, para. 10).  Furthermore, the LSBC has “particular expertise” when it comes to matters of policies and procedures in the legal profession, and their interpretation of ‘public interest’ is owed deference (Law Society, 2018, paras. 35, 37, 38). Members of their body are well-versed in law, including human rights issues. If the LSBC had approved TWU’s proposed law school, they would not have been able to achieve a proper regulation of law, which included diversity. They also would not be able to protect homosexual education rights. The LSBC has a “long history of deference to law societies when they self-regulate in the public interest” (Law Society, 2018, para. 36). The court also concluded that the LSBC “has primary responsibility for the development of structures, processes, and policies for regulation (Law Society, 2018, para. 37). Therefore, the LSBC had authority and expertise to consider matters of discrimination, unlike the BCCT. 
Another difference was found in differences between the schools TWU wanted to start. British Columbia only offers six postgraduate law degrees (Hotcoursesabroad). Because TWU’s law school was geared towards Christians, the chances of a homosexual going to TWU, and thus accessing legal education and the legal profession, would be significantly less than a Christian (Law Society, 2018, paras. 90, 95). It was an example of unequal opportunity for education. The court wrote “that an entire law school would be closed off to the vast majority of the LGBTQ individuals on the basis of their sexual identity (Law Society, 2018, para. 95). Essentially, if a homosexual person gives up their identity and signs the Covenant, they will have a chance of 60 more seats to enter into a legal education (Law Society, 2018, para. 95). On the other hand, TWU’s undergrad teacher’s program was one of many already existing in British Columbia. There are 17 schools that offer teaching degrees (Hotcoursesabroad). So, the court reasoned, that though there would be a lower chance of a homosexual individual to go to teachers college, the percentage was small and therefore trivial. The court wrote, “while homosexuals may be discouraged from attendign TWU, a private institution based on particular religious beliefs, they will not be prevented from becoming teachers” (Teachers, 2001, para. 35). Furthermore, the court found that diversity is reflected due to the many religious groups in Canada (Teachers, 2001, para. 33). The court concluded that there was no rational connection between the Covenant and TWU graduates treating homosexuals unfairly. 
The last distinguishing factor is the evidence of discrimination found in the two cases. The court in the Teachers case did not find TWU’s teachers college to discriminate directly against homosexuals. The main issue the BCCT had was whether teachers would be discriminatory if they were to teach in public schools (Teachers, 2001, para. 32). TWU wanted to assume full control of their program (Teachers, 2001, para. 2). TWU’s teachers college had already been running with their students attending the last year at Simon Fraser University (Teachers, 2001, para. 2). Graduates of TWU had been teaching in public schools, and there was no evidence that these graduates were discriminatory (Teachers, 2001, para. 38). Though the BCCT said that teachers from TWU were not discriminatory because students attended a public university, Simon Fraser University, in their last year, the court found this argument to be weak (Teachers, 2001, para. 38). There is no evidence that all students four-years deep in a certain mindset would have a sudden change in heart and belief from attending a public university like Simon Fraser (Teachers, 2001, para. 38). This is why the court was able to reject the BCCT’s speculative decision. On the contrary, TWU’s proposed law school had no history. Therefore, there was no evidence to prove or disprove that lawyers who would come out of the law school would be discriminatory. So, the court made its ruling based on the fact that TWU’s law school was discriminatory because homosexuals would have less chance to enter the legal profession and if they chose to attend TWU, they would have to give up part of their identity (Law Society, 2018, para. 39).  
Which approach to balancing religious equality rights do you find more just and convincing?
	I find the reasoning in the Teachers case more convincing, and I believe the court in Law Society should have come to different conclusions. In my opinion, the cases are essentially the same. If Law Society occurred in 2001, TWU’s law school would have been approved. The judges in Law Society were just more progressive. 
Religious organizations can discriminate. If not, it would be so hard to maintain that religion’s freedom, operation, and structure. If religious organizations had to accept anyone, regardless of religion, an atheist could come into a Baptist church and claim to be the next pastor. However, if the Baptist church denied him of the position, all people would agree that it is reasonable.  Under provincial law, TWU, as a religious institution, is able to discriminate against those who are not their religion (Law Society, 2001, para. 28). Additionally, TWU is not a public university that receives funding from the government. If TWU were a public university, then it would be reasonable for them to be under the government’s direction. Christians decided to open up a law school, not a group of non-religious people, so it is reasonable that the school benefits Christians. If a group of homosexuals wanted to open a law school to suit their beliefs, they could. However, Christians are less inclined to go to a university that promotes LGBTQ and more ‘woke’ agenda. So in reality, Chrsitians are being discriminated against because Christians would have to sacrifice part of their identity to attend a public and more progressive university. 
	The court in Law Society stated that “Eliminating inequitable barriers to legal education, and thereby, to membership in the legal profession, also promotes the competence of the bar and improves the quality of legal services available to the public” (Law Society, 2001, para. 42).  There are a couple of issues in this sentence. First, if religious schools and organizations of various beliefs exist, then it is inevitable for there to be inequitable barriers. Furthermore, a non-religious view is still a belief. So, if the government takes a non-religious direction and organizes their schools and other governing bodies in that manner, they are favoring those who are non-religious, and any other religious person is being discriminated against. And when the government does not allow TWU’s Covenant regarding marriage and sexual behavior, they are essentially saying that part of Christian belief is wrong. Next, just because homosexuals may not feel inclined to apply to TWU, they are still permitted to. On a macroscale and in comparison to other examples, all Christian schools technically do not promote diversity. In fact, to teach at a private Christian school, one must almost always profess that they are Christian. This is in accordance with the rationale behind s. 2(a) as well as the provincial law permitting religious organizations to prefer people of their own religion. A Christian or any religious organization has a purpose related to their religion. Allowing others who do not follow their religion to enter and participate can cause a disturbance to that religious organization. However, TWU in both cases, is not prohibiting the admission of homosexuals. They are merely seeking to follow their religion in the best possible manner, which they are permitted to do. The court and some would argue that it is not possible to condemn and not discriminate against the same practice, sexual behaviour outside of a marriage between a man and woman (Law Society, 2018, para. 97). However, this argument fails to recognize a true Christian and the dichotomy between a Christian’s ability to withstand from a certain sin, while treating others who engage in that sin with love and respect.
Should a homosexual student choose to go to TWU, the court found that the homosexual student would be harmed (Law Society, 2018, para. 96). The court also said TWU was basing entry into their school on personal characteristics (Law Society, 2001, para. 41). It was considered harmful because homosexual students would have to deny part of their identity, and if they did not choose to do this, they would face disciplinary action (Law Society, 2018, para. 96). First, it is reasonable to say that sexual activity is a private matter. So, unless a homosexual student is going around saying that he or she participates in homosexual behaviour, his sexual activity would probably be kept unknown. Even if it was known, most students, who are Christians, would act lovingly like they are taught to. They would not purposely snitch on a homosexual, so the homosexual can face disciplinary action, because the Covenant is meant for Christians and for TWU’s godly mission. Second, being homosexual is a choice. For example, someone may be very inclined to kill someone like they would be to like a person of the same sex, but they still have a choice whether they want to actually kill the person. So, an individual may have an inclination to participate in sexual behaviour outside of a marriage between a man and a woman, but ultimately, he has a choice. If everyone followed through with their inclinations and impulses, there would be chaos. People who are ‘impulse shoppers’ would end up in lots of debt. What if everyone who felt an impulse to rape someone followed through with it? Or what if there were judges that had the impulse to lie and show favoritism and followed through with their impulses? All people have impulses and inclinations, some right and some wrong, but ultimately people have the decision to choose whether they want to follow it. Thirdly, whether there is a Covenant or not, a homosexual is not likely to apply to Christian university. The Covenant represents and reflects the school’s values. So, just because prohibiting homosexuality is not in the Covenant, it does not mean it will not be in the mindset and actions of other Christian students. The environment will still be the same. So, whether a homosexual student attended TWU with or without the covenant, either way, they would not be harmed. 
	I agree with the Teacher’s case decision. The BCCT’s evidence was speculative. Having a Covenant that agrees with their authoritative religious text, does not mean or even support that the graduates would be discriminatory (Teachers, 2001, para. 33). In fact, I believe it is quite the opposite. Attending a school that promotes love and respect to all people would likely decrease the chances of discrimination. It does not discriminate against homosexual individuals but is geared towards Christians as a source of accountability to their faith. The Covenant is a personal choice that the individual makes.  So, teachers coming out of school that promotes respect and love towards all will be well equipped to teach and not discriminate in public schools. 
	The court in Teachers says that diversity of Canada is reflected through the existence of multiple religions and views (Teachers, 2001, para. 33). On the contrary, Law Society states that “being required by someone else’s religious beliefs to behave contrary to one’s sexual identity is degrading and disrespectful. Being required to do so offends the public perception that freedom of religion includes freedom from religion” (Law Society, 2018, para. 101). First, TWU is not forcing Christianity and their beliefs regarding sexuality on homosexual individuals. No one is pointing a gun at a homosexual’s head saying that they have to attend TWU.  The second issue here is that the ‘norms’ have changed. Homosexuality was not as significant in 2001 than in 2018. Laws are meant to be a structure of a society that should only be changed after much thought and analysis. If laws merely followed whatever was popular rather than what is right, a country would lose its direction. For example, abortion is a comparative issue. What was seen as wrong by the majority became the opposite. So, if a private organization cannot choose to operate in the borders of their religion and not conform to popular opinions, how can diversity exist? Do private organizations have to follow the micro and macro trajectories of popular and majority views? I believe that should never be the case unless  people are being harmed in a non-trivial manner.  
	A church is a religious organization, just like TWU. To be a member of a church, you most likely have to agree with and follow their Statement of Faith. A church does not exclude people from attending, regardless of where they are in life. A church encourages all people to attend. However, if a non-Christian were to attend a church, it is quite inevitable for the person to feel as though they do not fit into the church, and this is reasonable because they do not share the same beliefs. Becoming a member, continuing to hold a membership, and receiving membership renewal, however, requires the individual to profess their faith in Christ. Usually, a pastor or elder will interview the individual who wants to become a member. If TWU is holding to their statement of faith in accordance with their authoritative text, the Bible, they should put it in action. And TWU does put it in action through their Covenant document. Some people may lie to be a member of a church just like some people may sign the Covenant to attend TWU. Nevertheless, they can still attend and are welcome to attend, whether it be a church or whether it be TWU’s proposed law school. 
	In conclusion, homosexual individuals are not being discriminated against, nor are they being harmed if TWU’s law school were to be approved. Therefore, I believe that the Teachers court decision balanced TWU’s religious freedoms better.




References 
Hotcouresabroad: International Study Options Platform. Hotcourses International. (n.d.).
	https://www.hotcoursesabroad.com/



