Theodore Chiu
CLN4U
Mr. Shum
Feb 21, 2024
	FACTS AND REASONING OF THE LAW SOCIETY CASE
T. Chiu
Facts:
Trinity Western University (TWU) is a privately funded evangelical Christian University located in Langley, British Columbia [“Law Society”], 2018, para.1, 4). TWU’s goal is to provide students with an education that is rooted in Christ and develop Christian leaders that participate in the Great Commission (Law Society, 2018, para. 5). TWU also believes in the authority of the Bible; in the Bible, mankind is commanded to withhold themselves from sexual impurity outside of a marriage between a man and woman (Law Society, 2018, para. 6). TWU wanted to start a law school, but to attend the school, students and faculty must sign a Covenant, prohibiting sexual activity that is not between a married man and woman (Law Society, 2018, para. 1). 
The Law Society of British Columbia (LSBC), “the regulator of the legal profession in British Columbia,” rejected TWU’s proposal, but TWU argued that the decision went against their right to freedom of religion (Law Society, 2018, para. 2, 10). Though TWU won in the Court of Appeal, the Supreme Court found that the LSBC’s decision was reasonable and that the limitation on TWU’s religious freedom was proportionally balanced with the benefits of LSBC’s statutory mandate (Law Society, 2018, para. 3, 83, 105). It was concluded that “The resolution of the LSBC to declare that TWU’s proposed law school not be approved is restored” (Law Society, 2018, para. 106).





Reasoning:

The court could come to the issue of balanced proportionality, the court concluded that TWU’s religious freedoms were being infringed upon (Law Society, 2018, para. 61). The main issue the court had to consider was whether the LSBC’s limitation “reflected a proportionate balance of the Charter protection and the statutory objectives” (Law Society, 2018, para. 28). The LSBC’s statutory objective is “to uphold and protect the public interest in the administration of justice” (Law Society, 2018, para. 33). In order for a decision to be considered reasonable, the decision must proportionally balance the rights under the Charter and the statutory mandate (Law Society, 2018, para. 79). TWU’s Charter rights must be affected in the least amount reasonably possible (Law Society, 2018, para. 80). The court concluded that if LSBC were to approve TWU’s law school with the Covenant, Charter rights would be given more weight than the statutory mandate (Law Society, 2018, para. 84). Though the court recognized that the limitation caused the spiritual growth of students who wanted to attend TWU to be hindered, they decided that the decision was minimally invasive (Law Society, 2018, paras. 75, 85). LSBC only denied the mandatory Covenant; they did not deny the school because it was a Christian school (Law Society, 2018, para. 85). Furthermore, TWU would not compromise on the Covenant, which was the only part the LSBC had an issue with (Law Society, 2018, para. 85). The court stated that the limitation did not affect students who desired to follow the Covenant (Law Society, 2018, para. 86). The court reasoned that the Covenant was not a mandatory component of being an evangelical Christian; it only potentially affected students from studying in their preferred environment, where all students followed the Covenant (Law Society, 2018, para. 87). It was concluded that it was of minor invasiveness, because Chrsitians were not being denied the right to practice their religion (Law Society, 2018, para. 102). 
On the other hand, it had to be determined whether LSBC’s decision aided public interest (Law Society, 2018, para. 91). The court recognized that the LSBC’s decision was promoting equality in the legal profession because though TWU stated they were open to all people attending their school, most people who are part of the LGBTQ community would not apply due to the mandatory Covenant (Law Society, 2018, para. 93). TWU argued that there were so many other options that LGBTQ people could choose from (Law Society, 2018, para. 94).  Though there were many other schools LGBTQ people could apply to, the court found LGBTQ citizens to be at an unfair advantage because those who are willing to sign the Covenant would get a potential 60 more chances, and essentially an entire law school was being closed off to LGBTQ citizens (Law Society, 2018, paras. 94-95). Because LGBTQ individuals would have less options, the court reasoned it to be a case of inequality in education (Law Society, 2018, para. 95). The second reason the court gave was that it benefitted and protected the public was because it significantly decreased the risk that LGBTQ people would face from attending TWU’s law school (Law Society, 2018, para. 96). The court stated that it was harmful for one to deny and sacrifice a part of their identity or if they chose to ignore the Covenant, they would face disciplinary action, which again was harmful (Law Society, 2018, para. 96). TWU argued that LGBTQ students would not be harmed because as part of their Christian mission, students and faculty are supposed to treat each other with respect and love, regardless of differences (Law Society, 2018, para. 97). The court did not believe that it was possible to condemn and not discriminate against the same practice, sexual behaviour outside of a marriage between a man and woman (Law Society, 2018, para. 97). The court wrote, “Being required by someone else’s religious beliefs to behave contrary to one’s sexual identity is degrading and disrespectful” (Law Society, 2018, para. 101). Thus the court concluded the decision made by LSBC was reasonable (Law Society, 2018, para. 105). However, the court had to consider another issue, whether the LSBC had jurisdiction to make this decision. 
The court decided that it was within the LSBC’s jurisdiction to consider factors of admission into the legal profession in British Columbia, not related to academic qualification, if it maintained “the overarching objective of protecting the public interest”(Law Society, 2018, para. 29-31). TWU’s argument, that the LSBC should only consider the academic competence of students, was denied by the court (Law Society, 2018, para. 30). The courts favoured with the LSBC, that TWU’s mandatory Covenant made the entry to the TWU law school unequal, which would further place a barrier to those of the LGBTQ community who would seek to enter into a legal profession and represent other LGBTQ people (Law Society, 2018, para. 39). LSBC’s decision served the public interest because it promoted diversity in the legal profession as well as increased the representation and administration of justice for those who identified as LGBTQ (Law Society, 2018, para. 39). The court decided that TWU was indirectly not permitting entrance into their proposed law school purely based on personal characteristics (Law Society, 2018, para. 41). Also, a diverse bar, which was contrary to TWU’s proposed law school, would be more equipped to serve the needs of a diverse public (Law Society, 2018, para. 43). The court agreed that the TWU Covenant created an “inequitable admissions policy” (Law Society, 2018, para. 47). All these reasons served the public interest. Therefore, the court concluded that the LSBC’s decision was reasonable and that it served the public interest because it promoted equality in the legal profession as well as reduced and prevented harm to LGBTQ law students (Law Society, 2018, para. 40). 
