CHRISTIANITY UNIT
Birth of Church
How does the incarnation of Christ divide human history, spiritually and practically?
 The incarnation of Christ divides human history spiritually because without Christ, everyone was ‘in the same boat,’ trying to fill a chasm in their life. Practically, it separated different people groups – both in the different divides of religion, as well as different denominations in Christianity. 
2.  What Jewish holiday were Jesus’ disciples observing when the church was born? What does this holiday commemorate and why is this significant?
 Jesus’ disciples were observing Pentecost? when the church was born. Shavuot? Shavuot celebrates God giving the people the 10 Commandments. It is significant because here, God is giving the Holy Spirit, along with the power the Holy Spirit entails. 
3.  Why was it timely that the church’s birthday fell on this day?
 It was timely that the church’s birthday fell on this day because it is 7 weeks after Passover? 
4.  Approximately how many people did the Church start with?
 The church started with approximately 120 people. 
5.  Though it would have been easier to remain in the city of Jerusalem, what forced the early Christians to scatter and thus obey Jesus’ command to be His witnesses to the ends of the earth?
 Acts 1:7b states, “You will be my witnesses….to the ends of the earth.” Jesus did not want people to just stay in Jerusalem, but He wanted people to spread His message to all people. 
6.  Explain why the Roman emperor Nero initiated the first wave of persecution against the Christians.
 Nero initiated the first wave of persecution against the Christians because he was suspected to have burned the 10/14 cities so that he could rebuild it even more splendidly. He used Chrsitians as the scapegoat of the fire.                                                       	
7.  What is the Edict of Toleration, and what year was it implemented?
 In 311, the Edict of Toleration ended state-sponsored persecution. 
8.  What is the Edict of Milan and what year was it implemented?
 In 313, the Edict of Milan issued that Christianity was an authorized religion. 
9.  In what ways was the Edict of Toleration a positive event for the early church?  In what ways was it a negative event for the church?       	
 It was positive because Chrsiatns were not being persecuted/ physically harmed. It’s smooth sailing may have inhibited the faith and trust that would have been developed with persecution. 
10. In what ways was the Edict of Milan a positive event for the early church?  In what ways was it a negative event for the church?  
`    It was a positive event because Christinas could worship in public and talk about their faith. However, it may have been negative because it weakened a Christians dependency on Christ.  
Ecumenical Councils 						

What does the term “ecumenical” mean?

Coming together. 

What were the issues of major disagreement among Christians in the early church?

Arius: not hold to full divinity of Christ. There was a time “Logos” did not exist and that Jesus was subordinate to God. Athanasius argued against. Christ determined to be co-equal and co-eternal. 

(2) Apollinarius: denied human soul in Christ. Led to basic outline of trinitarian theology. 

(3) Nestorius: Mary is mother of human side but not divine. Therefore declared Mary was Theotokos (God-bearer). But why??

(3/4) How divine and human nature could co-exist in 1 person. Nestorius: 2 natures could never be fully united in 1 person. On the other hand, Eutyches: stress unity so much humanity swallowed up by divinity. Both positions condemned. → at Chalcedon (4) 2 natures, no detriment to either , continue to exist w/o confusion or change, (combat Eutyches’ idea of merging 2 natures) division or separation (exclude Nestorius separation)... Essentially, “1 person in 2 natures.”

(5) Condemned “Three Chapters”. Teachings were erred, like Nestorius. 

(6) Jesus had human will and divine will that function together in perfect harmony.  Condemned Monothelitism (believed Christ had only divine will).

(7) The place of images or icons in the life of Christian community (still Christological, but more practical/pastoral). Veneration of icons had been part of E. worship. John of Damascus: imaging of Jesus was part of incarnational theology. Conclusion to affirm the use of icons and other symbols as valid aspects of worship (not worship icons). 

What is meant by the “Christological question”?  

Is Jesus fully man, God, or both?

When and where did the First Ecumenical Council meet? Who called it?

Emperor Constantine called the First Ecumennical Council of the CHurch at Nicea in 325 → start of Nicene Creed. 

Who were two strong voices in the debate and what were their positions?

Arius did not hold to the fully divinity of Christ. He believed that there was a time where the Logos did not exist and that Jesus was subordinate to God. On the other hand, Athanasius argued that was declared to be “begotten not made” and “one in being”.  Athanasius argued that this was evidence for Christ the Son being co-equal and eternal with God the Father. 

How did the Council of Nicea answer the Christological issue? What was the result?

The Council of Nicea answered the Christological issue by concluding that Christ was fully divine and equal with God. Christ was begotten and not made. Furthermore, God is “one in being” (homoousios). 

When and where did the 2nd EC meet? Who called it?

The second EC met at Constantinople. It was called by Emperor Theodosius in 381. 

How did the First Ecumenical Council result in the need for the Second Council Ecumenical Council?

The First EC affirmed the fully divinity of Christ, which led to the need to affirm Chrsit’s full humanity. 

In addition to the Christological question, what else was addressed by the 2nd EC?

In addition to the Christological question, in the second EC, the council outlined the basic structure of the trinitarian theology by affirming the deity of the Holy Spirit. 

Where and when did the 3rd EC occur? Where and when did the 4th EC occur?

The third EC was held at Ephesus in 431. The fourth EC was held at Chalcedon in 451. 

Why were the 3rd and 4th EC's necessary? What subtle (yet important) issue did they deal with that was not directly addressed by the 1st and 2nd councils? 

The 3rd and 4th EC were important because it discussed how the 2 natures of Christ could exist in one person. The 1st EC addressed Christ’s divinity, and the 2nd addressed Christ’s humanity. However, the subtle issue was how these two natures could exist together. 

 Who did the 3rd and 4th councils oppose (include the positions of the views that were opposed)? How did they do this? i.e. What did the 3rd and 4th councils affirm?

Eutyches thought the 2 natures were merged. Nestorius thought the 2 natures could never be fully united in 1 person. The result: the 2 natures of Christ are w/o detriment to their full characteristics and exist w/o “confusion or change” (address Eutyches’ idea of the unity of Christ that the human nature is irrelevant/’swallowed up’) and “division and separation”(address Nestorius’ idea that 2 natures could never be united in 1 person)..

What is Monothelitism and what was the 6th council's stance on this view?

Monothelitism is a movement that believed Christ only had a divine will. The 6th EC addressed this issued by concluding that Jesus possessed both a human will and a divine will that function together in perfect moral harmony. This deduction stemmed from the affirmation of Chalcedon that Christ was 2 natures in 1. 
 
Where and when did the 7th EC meet? Who called it?

The seventh EC was called by Byzantine Empress Irene in 787 in Nicea. 

What was the main issue at hand in the 7th EC, what were the opposing views and who were they held by? How was the issue resolved?

The issue was whether images/icons belonged in the Christina community and worship. Veneration of icons had been a part of E. worship. John of Damascus defended the use of icons that imaging Jesus was part of an incarnational theology. Two emperors disagreed. The council concluded to affirm the use of icons and other symbols as a valid aspect of Christina worship. 

When and how the NT go on record as consisting of 27 books? 

Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, in 367 wrote a list of 27 books of NT.  Stemmed from Marcion, who argue OT should be thrown out because God of OT was very different from God presented by Jesus. 

What three criteria helped the Church Fathers discover which books were to be included in the cannon of Holy Scripture?

Written by an apostle or close associate
In accord with the rest of biblical revelation
Passed the test of experience (whereby through long use the Christian community had come to a consensus regarding divine inspiration). How so??

Summarize (as clearly and succinctly as possible) what the seven ecumenical councils concluded about the nature and person of Jesus Christ.

Nicea: Declared that Chrsit is fully divine.
Constantinople: Declared that Christ is fully human.
Ephesus: Declared that Christ is a unified person and that Mary is Theotokos (God-bearer).
Chalcedon: Declared that Chrsit is “two natures (divine and human) in one person”.
Constantinople: Reaffirmed Chalceon and condemned “the Three Chapters”.
Constantinople: Declared that Christ possessed both a human will and a divine will that function together in perfect moral harmony.
Nicea: Icons and other symbols are acceptable aids to worship and devotion. 

Does studying the Ecumenical Councils change your view on the benefits or drawbacks of the Edict of Toleration and the Edict of Milan?

No, but I think that without the Edict of Toleration and Milan, the clarity and discussion could not have occurred to the level it did. 

The Roman Catholic Church

What were the five main centers of the early Church?

Jerusalem, Antioch, ALexandria, Constantionople, Rome

What were the leaders called and what was their role?

Bishop: gave spiritual and theological leadership.

Why did the disparity of influence between these 5 centers begin?

Jerusalem lost influence when it fell to Rome in 70 AD (temple destroyed). Antioch and lLexandria had difficulty competing with the political clout of Rome and Constantinople. 

When and how did the East-West divide begin?

Emperor Constantine moved from Rome to Constantinople in 330. 

Although the five bishops were supposed to be equal, why were the bishops of Rome and Constantinople being treated as “first among equals?”

Rome and Constantinople had more power. Constantinople was the “New Rome”, which had new political/religious power. Rome had the ‘merit of martyrdom’ → greater faith?

How did Leo the Great finally end the struggle between ROme and Constantinople?

Leo saved Rome from Attila the Hun and the Vandals through diplomacy/persuasion. Started idea of “Apostolic SUccession” and took to himself Pontifex Maximus (greatest high priest). 

In what centuries did the various Roman Catholic crusades occur? What were some underlying reasons/ motivations?

11th, 12th, and 13th centuries. Intense religious fervor, love of adventure, personal profit. 

What is the “great papal schism” and how was it resolved?

Pope Clement V was elected but set up his papacy in Avignon, France, and he never stepped foot in Rome. Due to the clamor of the Roman mob, Italian pope Urban VI was elected, but in a few months, cardinals had 2nd thoughts and announced that he was aon apostate (illegitimate). Clement VII was chosen, who set up residency in Avignon. Now, there were 2 popes condemning each other. Resolution 1: deposed both and elected Alexandria V. But now there were 3 popes. Popes removed, then Martin V was elected. The result: weakened papacy, which led to Protestant Reformation. 

Great Schism just refers to split between Catholic (W. and Rome)  and Orthodox (E. 4 other cities). 

Who was the influential leader at the time of the First Vatican Council? When did it occur and why was it significant? 

The influential leader during the First Vatican Council was Pius IX. It happened in 1869-1870. It was significant because it was decided that when the pope makes decision about faith/morals in an official capacity (ex cathedra), his decision is infallible and immutable. In other words, the pope was placed above the Christian community. 

Briefly describe the bright and dark sides of the Roman Catholic Mission.

+: spread the Message to W. Europe, Scandinavia, British Isles, S.E. Europe, S. Russia, Asia, and N./horn of Africa. Lots of sacrifice and labour.

– : imperial conquest, forced conversion at sword. 

In what century did a great wave of missions occur under key figures such as Loyola and Xavier?

16th century. It was also known as the Catholic Reformation/Counter-reformation. 

Describe Loyola’s philosophy and success in missions?

Founded “society of Jesus,” also known as the Jesuits. They were chivalrous soldiers of Jesus ready to anywhere/everywhere. Went to Latin America, Asia, and Africa. 

Describe Xavier’s approach to missions in Japan.

He contextualized the gospel message into Japanese culture. He saw many Japanese values to be good and should be preserved and brought into the context of Chrstian life. 

Why should we remember Las Casa?

Las Casa was a Spanish missionary who spoke out for equality and freedom of Indians. Though only to seek conversion was through peaceful preaching and example of holy living. 

When did the Second Vatican Council occur and what was its main issue?

The Second Vatican Council occurred from 1962-1965. It was not to combat heresy, but for aggiornamento (bringing up to date). Main issue was to “rule with medicine of mercy rather than w/ severity.”

What 2 Declarations resulted? Summarize each. 

There was the Declaration of Religious Freedom  (Dignitatis Humanae) - renounced the principle to use force, but conversion through conscience. 

Declaration of Mission Activity of the Church (Ad Gentes Divinitus) - center on missions, in the dynamic activity of Trinity.  Son came as man to Earth. Holy Spirit was sent after resurrection. Emphasized mission was for all Christians, not just part of the Church. 

Declaration on the Relation to Non-Christian Religions (Nostra Aetate) - affirm good things in other religions, which can achieve some measure of salvation. “Not knowing” the faith is not their fault.

*** Turns/Downhill of the Church:
Power struggle and conflict between Rome and Constantinople. 
Leo took to himself Pontifex Maximus (title observed by Christ, who was truly the Great High Priest).
Like disciples talking about who is the greatest/who will be at the right hand of God.
Great papal schism. 

Easter Orthodox Church

The East-West divide can be trace back to a power struggle between which 2 cities?

Constantinople and Rome

The Eastern Orthodox Church was formed from the Eastern churches of what city/cities? The Roman Catholic Church was formed from the Western Churches of what city?

East: Alexandria, Constantinople, Antioch, and Jerusalem
West: Rome

What were the 3 factors that led to the split between the E. and W. churches long before the official break?

Language
Practices
Political relationships

Describe the events that took place in 1054 that historians look to as the official break between the East and West.

In 1054, Pope Leo IX sent Cardinal Humbert (a diplomat) to Constinople who placed a papal bull of excommunication, marking the official break between the east and west. 

Summarize the differences between the Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic churches.



Why does the word tradition capture the essence of the Orthodox church so well?

Tradition captures the essence of the Orthodox church because it is not just a mere handing down of beliefs and ideas, but a living connection to the faith of the apostles and the father of the church. There is an inner spirit of tradition. It is a living continuity with the Church throughout the ages, preserving the doctrine of the Lord and keeping tradition just as was received. 

Look at the results of the Google search: “Eastern Orthodox imagery Jesus Marh.”
What are some common features of these icons (mood, colour, style)?

Mary holding baby Jesuse, often a yellow background (idea of light). Mary has a veil. See right hand of Mary. Mary has a halo (holiness).

Icons of the baby Jesus present him in an unusual manner. What is usual about the way he is presented?

Jesus looks older, thinner, and more mature. He does not look like a baby. Maybe to represent that baby Jesus is different than other babies and has a maturity that comes from his divinity. 

How does the use of icons play into the E. Orthodox theology?

Icons allow Orthodox Christians to receive a vision of the spiritual world/window between heaven and earth. It is because God became man in Christ, invisible and can be made visible through portrayals in wood and point. 

How do the Easter Orthodox respond to the charge the theri use of icons violates Exodus 20: 4, 5: “not make for yourself an image in the form of anything in heaven above or on the earth …not bow down or worship them.”

Icons are not being worshiped, but venerated, like how the Bible is venerated by Christians. It means to an end (closer to God)?
 
How is hesychasm different from the prayers during morning exercises?

Hesychasm means stillness or peace. It is a meditative approach to prayer, a prayer of the entire person. It begins with the lips then descends to the minds into the heart. It allows intellect an heart to be unite. It is a prayer of the heart, totally uniting yourself to God and prayer itself. 

The Eastern Orthodox Church is not known for being highly missionary minded, but summarize how it was ‘found’ by what would become a great civilization?

Vladimir, Prince of Kiev, sent followers to search for true religion. Eastern Orthodox worship was described as divine and beautiful, and splendorous. 

Give examples of some individuals in E. Orthodox history who were shining examples of mission.

Constantine and Methodius in Slavic people. THey devised the Savic alphabet and translate the Bible into Slavic and held liturgical services in Slavic. It is surprising because many Europeans did not have that access, because they didn’t know Latin. Stephen: spread to primitive tribes in N. Russia, the Zyrian tribe, translated/held services in their language. 

What did Christianity in Russia look like during Mongol occupation? How might it have been different?

Russian church failed to convert the Mongols. Could have changed if Russioans gave up some of their national customs in favour of Mongol culture. The Eastern Orthodox Church was kept alive but restricted. 

How did Christianity spread across northern Russia?

Sergius: was in a northern monastery in Russia and sent out monks to other communities and faith spread all across Northern Russia.

How did Moscos come to prominence?

Kiev never recovered from the sacking of Mongols. Moscow took its place as the religious hub when Peter settled there. Then, Moscow came to see herself as Leader of the Orthodox world. Rome and Constantionple had fallen. Moscow was the “Third Rome.”
