Secretary’s Report April 17th

Meeting began at 7:38 am.

Prom
Goal: sell at least 50 tickets in order to not pay an extra fee Ticket prices:
Early bird: $80
Standard: $85
Late: $90

Gr12s that will MC: Marissa and Reis
they will guide through the whole night, and lead a game or two, otherwise other games will be led by either other gr 12s or the sc

We will visit the venue again this Saturday at 11am. 

Community service events 

Service run 

 April 28th:  students leave at 2:30pm from the school to bus, estimated to arrive at 4:30? 
Teachers coming: Mr. Radder, Mrs. Richardson, Mrs. Lee, Ms. Mootoo, Ms. Bennett, Mr. Lau
Giving instant oatmeal from costco (12) 
- Forms are due this Friday
 Missions team members can hand them in this week Monday
- Unusable and extra clothes from previous service run we are donating, as well as gift cards 
- Make a dress down day on Thursday or Friday that requires everyone to pay $2 (to pay for extra expenses…) 

Intramurals

Basketball finals → 4 games, 10 min games, 2 min shifts

First place game: Pilgrims and disciples 
Second place game: Ambassadors and heralds 

In desperate need to do the house points score, and publish it. Ethan will update this. 

For next week: Maybe ultimate frisbee or floor hockey?? 

Wonderland Trip 

Wonderland Trip
 Most things are already set, we just need to go to Mr. Gym Lau for forms and details, otherwise we just need to book buses.
- Mr Radder suggested combining our trip with the Middle School, which would be June 2nd 

Re-elections for SC

Next week we will have an Announcement for the next years sc elections, which will be held sometime within the end of May
Grade 12 will not be able to vote, while grade 8s will be allowed.
After the new sc is elected, possibly June 1st we can introduce them with an event?? (hose them down, ice cream truck) 

Hockey watch game 

After school in the gym on Wednesday 
Snacks? 
Will project the hockey game on the big screen projector for everyone to watch 
Will make an announcement soon (today or tmr) 

Meeting adjourned at 8:20am. 