Secretary’s Report April 11th

Meeting began at 7:42 am.  

Prom

Ticket schedule 
Schedule repeats every week until deadline
Monday: Marley and Wendy 
Tuesday: Ethan and Misia 
Wednesday: Whoever's doing pizza, the other person also be available to sell tickets (since there are always two ppl and a teacher) 
Thursday: Reis and Marissa 
Friday: Enoch and Gabriel

Will not have a hard copy ticket, instead will have a QR code sent to their email. 

Procedure: If a student would like to purchase a ticket, you will write down this information in the google sheet: 
1. their first and last name
2. their grade (A or B)
3. their ticket number

Ticket prices: 
Early bird: $80
Standard: $85
Late: $90

Promotional 
Ticket design has been made, and is being sent out to all students 
Maybe make a promotional reels video on the sc insta 
Everyone can meet up after school to create the video by tomorrow and finish it by tmr for chapel 
Maybe a dress down day (in order to pay for teachers..?) 

Community Service Events
Service Run
April 28th 
Everything is planned (!!)
Teachers coming: 
Mr Radder, Mrs. Richardson, Mrs. Lee, Ms. Mootoo, Ms. Bennett, Mr. lau, Mr. Shin 



Intramural
NO intramurals this week, due to ss school trip on thursday 

Seniors school trip
Date: April 13th 
Mr. Radder will bring a barbeque and cook the hotdogs ahead of time, and transport the food by car and trays to the park, as well as a few cases of water  
Will they count for points? 
House shirt non-uniform day 
Bathroom runs: they will have to go to a nearby gas station or Tim Hortons every hour with a teacher to supervise them. 
Mrs. Lee has scheduled times for students to go in order not to create disorder
10 teachers will be coming, essentially all homeroom teachers

Promotional
Gabriel needs to make a poster for this soon 
Permission forms will be made by Mr. Shin, allowing them to come 
The house captains have met up to create games for the day, which will last half the day.
The rest of the day will be free time in the park 
House captains will have another meeting before the 14th this week. 

Wonderland Trip
Most things are already set, we just need to go to Mr. Gym Lau for forms and details, otherwise we just need to book buses. 
Around June 1st or 2nd, before exam

Re- Elections
New student council will be elected by June, possibly after the wonderland trip on the ssact block and make an event to introduce them (hose them down, ice cream truck)
Sometime late may 

Meeting Adjourned at 8:18 am.  




