
Birkenstock Jesus

Props list: 
Jesus costume (ask Renee, wig, outfit)
Recyclable trash bin 
Flip-flops or crocs
Plastic bags 
Alex’s headphones
Cinema glasses
Paper plate 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(Have Alex as Jesus come up in front of all of us and stand looking grand and mighty)

(Daniel) If Jesus came to visit us today 
(Misia) Would he recycle everything he had? (Veer puts recycle bin in front of Alex and he throws his wig inside)
(Navon) Would he wear Birkenstocks or flip-flops or Crocs? (Alex showing him hold flip-flops or crocs, then throw them somewhere)
(Veer) Would he ban every plastic bag? (Daniel brings plastic bag to Alex’s face and then he punches it)

(Everyone, together)
Would all dolphins swim free from every tuna casserole? (Action of dolphin swimming)
Would all the hungry be fed (Action rubbing stomach)
Would all the homeless be given a home? (Action of hand over head to make roof)
Would he raise Elvis back from the dead? (Action of disco point action)

(Daniel) What kind of music would he listen to? (Navon puts headphones on Alex for a BRIEF second, the puts it away)
(Misia) What kind of movies would he like to see? Would he watch Jesus of Montreal
And listen to Peter, Paul, and Mary? (Veer puts cinema glasses on Alex for BRIEF second)
(Navon) If Jesus came to visit us today 
How would he react to the church? 
Would he respond, 
(Alex, with grand voice) “Well done, my good and faithful servants”?
(Navon) Or would he say,
(Alex, with confusion) “What the…?” 
(Veer) Would the church celebrate the visitation of Christ 
And bake him a cake a la mode? (Misia w/ empty plate with nothing on it and kneel in front of Alex)  
(Veer) Would they welcome him with love and tears of joy? (Daniel with welcoming gesture)
Or would they kick him out because of their dress code? (Daniel kick Alex to the floor immediately after)

(Misia) What kind of music would he listen to?
What kind of movies would he like to see? Would he watch Jesus of Montreal
And listen to Peter, Paul, and Mary? (These three stanzas Alex just stands there and does replay action with fingers, since this is a repeating stanza)
(Daniel) And what about Mel Gibson’s Passion of the Christ? 
Would he give two thumbs up for the screenplay? (Two thumbs up)
(Everyone) How would he be and what would he say
If he came to visit us today? 