Marketing Review 1
1. What are the benefits of competition?

Competition creates new business and larger selections. It also encourages better prices, service, efficiency, technology, and productivity.

2. What is the difference between disposable and discretionary income?

Disposable income is the income or money that a person receives after taxes have been deducted from the gross income. Discretionary income is the disposable income, but expenses and needs have been deducted. Discretionary can be used for saving, investing, or spending.

3. Describe indirect and direct competition.

Indirect competition, is competition between companies that are not selling the same good or service. The companies are competing over the consumer's income.

Direct competition, is competition between companies that are selling the same good or service with very few differences. The companies are competing over each other's product image.

4. What are 5 ways in which products compete?

Quality, increase in quality will attract more customers.
Price, consumers are enticed by a lower price.
Design, every product has a design component and a good packaging/physical appeal is considered to be a competitive advantage.
Features, the improved features or a product gives a competitive edge over another.
Benefits, consumers buy products/services for a purpose, including benefits provide a competitive advantage over another.

5. What are 5 ways in which services compete?

Convenience, consumers don't want to spend lots of time, this includes easy to reach locations and simple URLS.
Degree of service, businesses of the same type will either offer more, or offer less. Fewer can be beneficial because consumers are left with fewer choices, making it simpler to choose.
Selection, offering a variety of brands and options for the consumer can be advantageous.
Reputation, word of mouth marketing. People with good experiences will sometimes share, and people with bad experiences will always share.
Price, lower prices are an extremely obvious competitive edge.

In free market, businesses can make money
- Creation of new business
- Loger selections
- Better service
- Better prices
- Increased efficiency
- Increased productivity
- New and improved products
- New technolgies