Censorship Article Questions

	Censorship in simple terms is any piece of media, book, or piece of information that is restricted/banned from certain age groups, places, or areas. Before reading this article, I believed that censorship was the redacting of any sensitive information shared within media which is deemed un-plausible for the general public. Things like explicit lyrics or words in songs would be censored, just as certain books would also censor sensitive information and swear words. Within multiple forms of media, people within production and creation teams tend to insert real-world struggles and problems into what they create. Thus the consumers of media works can relate to what they see, which acknowledges the awareness of actual problems going on. 
Overall, I do agree with general censorship purposes discussed within the article, but in extreme situations, there should be limits towards them. Pieces of media that include explicit words and scenes (i.e. songs, movies, shows, games, etc) are usually censored, and that is completely understandable. In some cases (usually when it comes to songs and games), companies will release a censored version and an uncensored/explicit version. That way, people who are not comfortable with sensitive content/words can choose what to  see/hear. In extreme cases with more explicit topics beyond the occasional swear word (i.e. sexual, history sensitive, mental health content), one would assume that there would definitely be censorship laws incorporated within. That is not always the case. In situations where the creators intend to add more sensitive topics, the limit of censorship should be placed here. These media topics are meant to be more explicit than normal content, the only thing people should add to these are warnings. If an audience is not comfortable with consuming any material that is too explicit, then they shouldn’t be looking at it in the first place. 
	While censorship is generally used to “shield” the public from abnormal content, too much of it can also be posed as a potential danger. In Canada, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms section 2b (Charterpedia - Section 2(b) – Freedom of Expression, n.d.) indicates that we have the right to freedom of expression, beliefs, and opinions. This also includes the freedom to express beliefs and opinions within the media as well. Censorship goes against this section as they impose restrictions, and is considered a suppression of free speech. This limits others in what they truly want to express through entertainment; it is especially fatal when it comes to more explicit forms of media portrayed through sensitive topics. Matters including mental health, world/personal issues, and many more topics addressed by the entertainment industry could presumably silence positive messages trying to be projected to audiences for awareness. This could lead to a minimizing of people reaching out to give their perspectives, simply speaking up on sensitive matters, or suppressing important findings that could be of importance. Aside from this, censorship can also lead others to misinterpreting information; even the smallest matters being censored can change the entire trajectory of what a media was meant to portray. Thus leads to a lot of confusion and misunderstandings that may bring forward hate from the general public. 	

References
Charterpedia - Section 2(b) – Freedom of expression. (n.d.). Department of Justice. Retrieved September 9, 2024, from https://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/csj-sjc/rfc-dlc/ccrf-ccdl/check/art2b.html
