	The books Dear Martin and The Book Thief  highlight many different social injustices that occur. An injustice that is highlighted is systemic racism but shown in two different ways. In Dear Martin, systemic racism was more implicit. While in The Book Thief, systemic racism was more explicit. The implicit and explicit examples are illustrated in their schooling, the justice system, and the government's influence on people's thoughts and decisions. 

	Systemic racism is a prevalent topic in both books. There are many examples to illustrate this, one of which is the school system in both books. Although there is a difference between them. In Dear Martin, the university that Justice, the protagonist of the book, applies to and eventually gets accepted into has a policy that causes the people who attend the school to inadvertently think more racist towards those of colour. This system sets aside a certain amount of spots that people of colour can get. Thus, when people are at school and see someone of colour they have the thought of, they might only be there because of the exception given to students of colour. If that person already had a racist agenda, then this only elevates and affirms their point of being racist more. One student even says. “I know for a fact it is because I’m white and he’s black.” (Stone, 59) Although this act from the university may not intentionally cause others to be racist, the school system does not do anything to try and help this issue. This kind of racism is implicit, as it is not outwardly expressed, and is hidden beneath the system. Contrary to Dear Martin, The Book Thief illustrates a more explicit systemic racism. We can see that they are not trying to hide anything at all, or even unintentionally causing racism, but they are outwardly expressing their racist intent. In the time that The Book Thief was set in Germany when the Nazis and Hitler were in power. They were anti-semitist, and very clearly and outwardly expressed this. We see that they do not allow Jews to go to school or get an education. They force them to go to concentration camps and slave away or hide to not be found and captured. We can also see that they were so prejudiced that they wanted only blond hair and blue eyes. Liesel, the protagonist in The Book Thief, just barely passes and is allowed to go to school and live a relatively normal life. “Her hair was a close enough brand of German blond, but she had dangerous eyes. Dark brown. You didn’t really want brown eyes in Germany around that time.” (Zusak, 45) In both books systemic racism has been implemented and shown, but the ways that each book illustrates it are vastly different. Dear Martin shows a problem that occurs more often in modern society, while The Book Thief shows a problem that still currently exists, but is minimal. In any case, both books show the detriment that systemic racism, and racism in general, brings to the school system. 

	Systemic racism not only reaches the school system but also the justice system. In both books, we see clear explicit racism that comes from The Book Thief, but a surprising amount of explicit racism comes from Dear Martin as well. Dear Martin illustrates a time that is closer to ours, a modern society. So it is saddening to see such explicit racism displayed at a time when racism should be on the decline. We see an example early on where Justice is helping his ex-girlfriend, Melo, but a cop immediately assumes that he is up to no good and cuffs him. “Melo’s drunk beyond belief in the backseat of a car she fully intended to drive, yet Jus is the one in handcuffs.” (Stone, 7) This shows a cop with a clear racist agenda and racist profiling. We see another instance in Dear Martin when Justice and his friend Manny are driving around the neighbourhood. They stop at a light and a white man stops next to them and gives them a very aggravated look. They turn down the music they were playing and turn it back up when the light turns green and they start driving. At the next light, the white man stops next to them again and shouts at them to turn the music down. Manny gets mad and tells him, no, it's his car. The man gets unreasonably angry and calls them a slur. Manny gets mad, but before he can get out more than a couple of words, the man shoots at them, injuring Justice and killing Manny. This man turns out to be an off-duty cop. He was racist and took extreme actions in an unnecessary situation. When they went to court the cop, Officer Garrett, lies and exaggerates the situation, trying to make it seem more reasonable. The court was more inclined to believe Officer Garrett than Justice, showing a more racist and biased court. This shows explicit racism coming from both the court and the police force. In the same vein, The Book Thief shows racism in their police force as well. Their police commit acts of extreme brutality against those who are Jewish, or even help those who are Jewish. This is shown when a character, Hans, gives bread to a malnourished Jew. “Hans Hubermann held his hand out and presented a piece of bread, like magic.” (Zusak, 475) They find out about it and proceed to whip Hans without mercy. “Hans Hubermann was whipped on the street.” (Zusak, 476) The police force and army search for any Jews hiding, so that they may take them away to concentration camps, where they would work, and eventually die a brutal death. It is sad to see how in both books, both times, the force that is meant to protect the people who live in the country does the opposite. 

	A racist government leads to racist people. In The Book Thief, we can see this clearly. People treat Jews terribly, they beat them, hand them over to authorities, destroy and vandalize their homes, and so on. These acts are influenced and increased by the government, the Nazi regime. Although there was anti-semitism already in Germany, Hitler’s reign made it much worse. Many Jews had to hide away lest they get captured, beaten, slaved away, or even killed. They were dehumanized, made to be not people, but Jews. “Once in a while a man or woman — no, they were not men and women; they were Jews — would find Liesel’s face among the crow. They would meet her with their defeat.” (Zusak, 473) In Dear Martin, we can see this in a more implicit form. We can see the influence the school has on the students and the media’s influence on the people. In Dear Martin, we see the media interview those who are more connected to Officer Garrett who shot Justice and Manny. The people interviewed defend Garrett and make it seem that it was justified, and give no other quotes from those who might know more about the situation or those who know the people from the other side. They interview his neighbour, and a couple of other officers who know Garrett, but not anyone who might know Justice. Many people believe what is displayed in the media and, “picketers wore T-shirts that read ‘Race Baiting should be a crime'”. (Stone, 131) From the examples of both books, we can see how the government influences the people, and how the government’s control of things such as the media, can easily influence people. 

Systemic racism is everywhere, in schools, in the justice system, and influencing the population. We can see many different examples of systemic racism in both The Book Thief and Dear Martin, even though they portray vastly different times. Showing us how it is hard to remove things that are rooted in our system. Even today we see a lot of systemic racism, whether it be at work, in the justice system, or at school. We need to be aware of this problem and see how this affects us. These two books do a wonderful job of portraying these social injustices, and we should use this as an opportunity to reflect on ourselves, and as a population as a whole. 



Bibliography
Zusak, Mark. The Book Thief. Alfred A. Knopf, Penguin Random House LLC 2005. 
Stone, Nic. Dear Martin. Crown Books for Young Readers, 2017. 


