HSP3U Unit 1 Intro to SAP test review

Disciplines in Social Sciences
Psychology: Scientific study of the human mind, mental states, and human behavior
Anthropology: Scientific study of humans, including their origins; behavior; and physical, social and cultural development.
Sociology: Scientific study of human social behavior, including individuals, groups, and societies.

All 3 Disciplines of social science involve Language, Critical Thinking, and Social Science Inquiry

Key Questions Social Scientists Address in Exploring Human Behavior
Social Scientists ask four fundamental questions:
What happens?
How does it happen?
Why does it happen?
How can people change what happens?

Social Issue
Social Issues are topics or subjects that impact many people. They often reflect current events but also represent long-standing problems or disagreements that are difficult to solve.
Not all problems are social issues. To be considered a social issue, the problem must:
Have consequences for many people in society
Be widely recognized as an issue that needs solving 
Go against common beliefs and values
Be solved through community action, regulation, or resources

Interdisciplinary Approach
Integrate mainly the 3 following disciplines in an interdisciplinary approach 
Anthropology
Sociology
Psychology
An interdisciplinary approach gives a more complete picture of the object of study as it combines various perspectives. Example: The Blind Men and the Elephant

Psychology Meaning and What do they Study?
Scientific study of the human mind and mental states and how they influence human behavior
Psychologists study how we think, feel, and behave from a scientific viewpoint.
They want to apply this knowledge to help people predict, describe, and control their behavior and mental processes
Many subfields in psychology:
Social Psychology may study why groups of people tend to conform. 
Developmental psychologists may investigate what might be the cause of some developmental delays in children
Personality psychologists may study what are the major influencers of personality are, and more

Anthropology Meaning and What do they Study?
The study of the origin and development of human societies and culture
Observe human behavior (how they live, think, communicate, produce, and interact) in their social and physical environments.
Study of cultural factors (arts, beliefs, habits, institutions, etc.) that are characteristic of a specific community, society, or nation.
Anthropologists seek to understand what makes us human.
There are many subfields of anthropology:
Cultural anthropologists may live within society to observe behavior in its natural setting.
Archaeologists may study ancient human societies through archaeological excavation
Jane Goodall is a famous primatologist who studied chimpanzees in Tanzania.
Sociology Meaning and What do they Study?
The scientific study of human social behavior in different contexts (individually, in groups and societies)
Includes the study of how groups of people, who share common characteristic(s), function together
Seeks to be able to determine patterns of behavior.
Many subfields in sociology:
Gerontologists may be concerned with problems the aging population may face in the face of population collapse.
Political scientists may be concerned with developing policy to encourage couples to have children.
Economists may be concerned with the outcomes from inflation.
For this Section Read the Montreal Massacre Article and the Marc Lepine article also textbook pages 4-9

Ask Questions Like a Social Scientist
Before an investigation, social scientists ask many questions as they try to determine what shapes human behavior. Taking an interdisciplinary approach, looking at a particular topic or issue from various perspectives (anthropology, sociology, psychology) allows the social scientists to gain much deeper insights into human nature.
When social scientists study issues, they follow a scientific inquiry process. Today, we will focus on the “exploring” part of the inquiry process

Questioning Grid
Makeup questions using the homeless man picture

Types of Questions:
Depending on the wording, your questions may be: factual, predictive, analytical, or application. Below are some examples:

Factual: Who is the Homeless Man?
Predictive: Where would he stay when it is cold outside?
Analytical: How did he become homeless?
Application: How should we address the issue of homelessness?

A really good inquiry question for social scientists acts as a guide for research. It keeps the researcher focused on what kinds of sources to use and helps shape the results of the inquiry. It often inspires new questions that allows one to probe even more deeply into a topic, once the inquiry has begun. As such, it should be neither too narrow nor too broad, and provide the space necessary to go deeply into the topic. 

Know how to write a question in response to a topic like the topic of homelessness.
Examples
Anthropologists: Could cultural factors around have influenced people’s homelessness like in the culture they’re in?
Sociologist: Were these individuals left out because of the social behavior of the community?
Psychologist: How might the behavior of a society influence people’s experience in homelessness?
Social Scientists Research Methods
Quantitative Research methods
Experiments: There’s an independent variable(observes effects). It is applied only to the experimental group and not the control group. To be accurate the effects of the independent variable should occur in the experimental group and not the control group.
Surveys: Researcher asks sample group questions, record answers. Questionnaires the questions written and given Questionnaires can be used efficiently with very large sample groups. Interviews are often conducted orally and contain open ended questions. Interviews are suitable for smaller sample groups and for studies in which answers cannot be anticipated. Accuracy depends on survey questions and to not be biased.
Content Analysis: Researcher examines and classifies the ideas presented in a sample group of communications, such as books, letters, movies, or television commercials. Researchers define variables before conducting the research. Although it can be difficult to obtain a reliable sample. 
Secondary Analysis: Researcher analyzes data that has been gathered for another purpose in order to gather evidence  for his or her own investigation. Ex. A Researcher could examine school attendance records to investigate the simple hypothesis.

Qualitative Research Methods

Observations: In observation, the researcher watches and records the subjects behavior. Observations might be conducted in a laboratory setting.  A natural setting is preferred like a home or a playground. Researchers can observe from a distance, perhaps using cameras, so that the subjects are unaware that they are being observed.
Participant Observation: Researcher is a participant in the group and the subjects are aware that they are being observed.
Interviews: In qualitative interviews, the researchers ask the subject to describe and explain his or her behavior. As a method of qualitative research, interviews are useful for determining the motivation for the subject's behavior; it might not be visible to the researcher. Accuracy depends on the interview questions being asked should ask subjects  to discuss actions after they occur rather than to speculate about what they might do. Interviews are often combined with participant observation.

Checking the Validity of sources
When was it published?
Where was it published?
Who is the author? What is the author’s purpose?
Who is the intended audience?
Who is the author’s point of view or theoretical perspective?





Process of Inquiry

What is Socialization

Process by which a child/individual learns to think and act in certain ways
How they acquire certain behavior patterns, skills, beliefs, and values
How they learn the accepted ways of behaving within specific culture
How they become participating members of their society/culture

2 main ways of how do we know what we know:
Formal/Intended - direct teaching of values/behavior
Informal/Unintended - indirect learning - often observational

7 Steps of Inquiry method:
Isolate & define problem
Formulate a hypothesis
Establish a Procedure
Gather information
Compile & Analyze data
Draw conclusions
Questions for further research

Conducting Background Research

You should always check to see if your question has been answered before
Research your topic of interest and determine whether your experiment has been done
If so, your research may lead you to another question

Ask a Question… Be Observant!

Before you form a hypothesis or begin your research, you have to first ask a question
You cannot make a guess without first formulating a question
Ask a question in the area you are interested in studying
This question should be based on patterns you see in the world around you

Create a Hypothesis

Make an educated guess (hypothesis) to answer your question.
A hypothesis is a precise, testable statement of what the researchers predict will be the outcome of the study
This usually involves proposing a possible relationship between two variables: the independent and dependent variables
INDEPENDENT VARIABLE: the variable whose effect is being studied
DEPENDENT VARIABLE: what is being measured and may change in response to manipulation of the independent variable

Theories vs. Hypotheses
Hypothesis: Formed before any applicable research has been done
Theory: Formed after enough research has been done
A framework for organizing & explaining observable evidence
May have many theories to explain the same sets of observations 
Many theories were developed in the mid 20th century, a time of intensive study in the social sciences
2 Key components of psychological theory:
It must describe a behavior
It must make predictions about future behaviors

Primary vs Secondary Sources (Social science research model)
Secondary research
Topic area ➩ Research question ➩ Literature Review
Primary research
Research question/ hypothesis ➩ Questionnaire interviews experiment observations ➩ Data collection








Social Science Research Methods


Sample Survey
Ask a set number of questions to a small group of people
Specifically chosen to represent a larger group of people
Open Questions: cannot be answered using yes or no
Closed questions: can be answered using yes or no
Advantages: information gathered quickly and cost-effectively, easy to analyze, can get information on a wide variety of topics and opinions
Disadvantages: information gathered  is limited to what questions ask, misunderstanding, honesty or untruthfulness

Interview
Ask a number of questions to a very small group of people
Answer as a dialogue/ conversation
Advantage: Can get large amounts of in-depth information
Disadvantage: Costly, time consuming, need to have well-trained interviewers

Experiment
Determine how one factor influences the other
Case study
Writing a Research Report
Title: Identify the main idea of your paper and include the variables
Abstract: Write a summary, in about 100-150 words, of the topic that you investigated, the methods, the results, and the meaning of the results
Introduction: Identify the research question, define the terms, relate the study to the summary of the review of literature, and state the purpose of the primary study.
Methods:
Sample Group- Describe the parameters you used to select the participants for the study and how you selected a representative sample
Instruments- Describe the survey, questionnaire, interview or observation schedule, or experiment used in organization.
Procedure- Outline, step by step, how you  conducted the research. Describe what you said and did in precise action terms.
Results: State your main findings, supported by detailed descriptions of the evidence, and including case studies or statistical analysis. This may include graphs or charts.
Discussion: Summarize the results of your research, explain how the results relate to the review of literature and the theoretical perspective you used in the analysis, and outline the implications of the results. State whether your hypothesis was supported or not. Briefly state your conclusions.
References: In a research paper, include citations(APA) to tell the reader where you found the information. Use in-text citations, like those used in this textbook, to refer your reader to the references at the end of the paper that acknowledge all your sources. The American Psychological Association (APA) style is the preferred style in the social sciences.

Ethical Research
Any research using human subjects should be conducted in an ethical manner that respects both the well being and the dignity of the people. Procedures outlined by school boards ensure that this happens in your course of studies. If your research requires some sort of deception you could obtain general consent, but then you must explain the deception as soon as possible afterwards. Finally you must inform the subjects if the research would cause them any physical or emotional discomfort. When designing your investigation, choose the method that will be most effective while being respectful of the people who are helping you in your research.

Academic Honesty
There are also ethical issues affecting the reporting of your research. Do not change, omit or make up evidence in a mistaken attempt to improve your report. Any shortcomings should be dismissed as a legitimate part of the discussion in a valid research report. Make sure you use citations and references to give credit to the original authors of any work you have consulted, but ensure that the report reflects your own analysis and conclusions. You need to let the subjects that are participating know the results as soon as they’re available. Since the point of the research is answering questions you are required to make sure that the report presents the evidence accurately. 

Avoiding Plagiarism
To submit all or part of someone else’s work as your own is called plagiarism and the consequences of plagiarism are severe. You must identify your sources. Give specific credit to your sources when you use an idea from them, even if you state the idea in your own words. Indicate exactly where you  found a quotation if you use the author’s words. To avoid confusion, do not read sample says. Do your own paper analysis and form your own conclusions. Write your own papers. If you do not, you will be subject to academic or professional discipline.


Applying The Research Process

Step 1: Development of the Research Question
Generate possible research questions related to the topic representing each of the 3 disciplines

Step 2: Conduct a Literature Review
The second step of the social science research process is to conduct a review of other research on your chosen topic. 
Identify Appropriate resources for the study
Search 3-5 appropriate sources

Step 3: Design an Original Investigation
Select a research method that is suitable for the investigation
Define sample and number of people

Step 4: Data Collection and Analysis
Consider how to tally the results, how technology can support you, and what you will need to look for when analyzing the data
 
Step 5: Prepare Your Final Report
At the end of this process, your goal is to have a final report that can be shared with other
Includes Title, Abstract, Introduction, Method, Results, Discussion, References
Consider Ethical Research, Academic Honesty, and Avoiding Plagiarism













Ethics in Social Science Research
Ethics - moral principles that govern a person’s behavior or the conducting of an activity
Ethical guidelines:
**All researchers must follow for their research to be valid
**Set out for the protection of the human participants

Ethics in Anthropology
Must take on the role of “ learner” while the informants are the “teachers”
Assume they know nothing (anthropologists)
Take on the perspective of an “outsider”
Re-evaluate all of their own tacit cultural knowledge

Explicit cultural knowledge- information about a culture that is easily explained and described

Tacit cultural knowledge- information about a culture that the people within the culture or organization know but have difficulty explaining

Anthropology Ethical Guidelines


Researchers must reveal to subjects that they are doing research
Subjects must be free to avoid contact with the researcher if they choose to
Subjects must give their informed consent, they must know as much as possible and in their own cultural terms about what the researcher is doing
Subjects must be given given the opportunity to provide feedback on manuscript
Researchers must assure the confidentiality of any information shared with them.
There must be no harm to the dignity, safety, and privacy of the informants
There must be no secret research for the government or private companies; all research must be published in an academic publication
There must be a clear purpose to the research, the researcher must have a question that he or she attempts to answer and is not intruding on the subjects lives for no reason.

Ethics in Sociology

Ethical guidelines within sociology were created to help sociologists carry out their research professionally and with integrity to ensure honesty, truthfulness, and harm reduction.
Some core rules for sociologists to consider:
Sociologists are expected to co-operate on the basis of scientific correctness alone, without discrimination.
Group work, co-operation, and mutual exchanges among sociologists are necessary for sociology to achieve its ends.
Sociologists should be aware that their assumptions may have an impact on society. They must keep an unbiased attitude as much as possible and not conceal their own ideological position(s). No sociological assumption should be presented as absolute truth.
Sociologists should act with a view to maintaining the image and the integrity of their own discipline

Ethical guidelines of Sociology

Sociologists enter into personal and moral relationships with those who they study. They have a responsibility to respect the rights and be concerned with the welfare of all the populations affected by their work. 
Researchers must not exploit individuals or groups for personal gain and must recognize the debt incurred to the communities in which they work.
Researchers must respect the rights of citizens to privacy, confidentiality, and anonymity, and the right to not be studied.
Research should be based on the freely given informed consent of those studied and researchers must inform research subjects that they have the right not to answer particular questions or to withdraw without penalty at any point in the research process.
Researchers should not misuse their positions for fraudulent purposes or as a pretext for gathering intelligence for any organization or government.

Ethics in Psychology

Psychologists performing experiments on people must take care not to inflict any undue harm.
Experiments have some benefits:
It can be helpful to study a situation by reconstructing it, or an aspect of it, in a controlled environment, e.g. study the effects of alcohol on reflexes.
Allows the researcher to manipulate a variable of interest while controlling other variables.
Experiments can be re-created by other psychologists using the same conditions to establish their validity.
Unfortunately, the early days of psychology saw some experiments go too far with little regard for the people involved in the experiment.

Ethical Guidelines of Psychology:

Make every reasonable effort to ensure that the psychological knowledge is not misused, intentionally or unintentionally, to infringe on human rights.
Obtain informed consent for all research activities that involve obtrusive measures, invasion of privacy, more than minimal risk of harm, or any attempt to change the behavior or research participants.
Avoid doing harm to all involved.
Not carry out any scientific or professional activity unless the probable benefit is proportionately greater than the risk involved.
Use a procedure subjecting animals to pain, stress, or privatization only if an alternate procedure is unavailable and the goal is justified by its prospective scientific, educational, or applied value.
Not exploit any relationship established as a psychologist at the expense of the best interests of the participants. 
Acquire an adequate knowledge of the culture, social culture, and customs of a community before beginning any major work there.

