SCIENCE 
Biology 
Cell
3 REASONS WHY CELLS DIVIDE
Reproduce
Repair damage
Grow 

Reproduction 
Asexual Reproduction
Parent cell division results in 2 new organisms
Ideally has a complete set of genes
Only ONE parent
Produce symmetric or asymmetric

Sexual Reproduction
2 parents needed
Gametes - these cells contain only half of the DNA usually found in a body cell.
When 2 gametes combine, offspring inherits characteristics from both parents.
Repair
Body sheds lots of cells each day
New blood cell replaced every 120 days
Divide to heal injuries
New cells must replace a cell when it dies
   P
Growth   
Basic process of all life, reach a size limit
As surface area increases, so does the cells’ ability bc.  to transport materials through membrane
Larger the volume, greater the number of reactions that can occur in the cytoplasm
(In reference to the solute concentration)
Diffusion | High concentration → Low concentration (movement of 	either the solvent or solute) 
Osmosis  | less concentrated → more concentrated (movement of the solvent) 


CELL CYCLE
Three stages in cell cycle
Interphase
Mitosis 
Cytokinesis


Interphase: When the cell grows and does its job, replicates DNA, gets ready for mitosis 

Mitosis: the splitting of the nucleus into two daughter nucleuses 
PMAT 
Prophase: DNA bundled into chromosomes, they are visible, the nucleolus disappears, centrosomes begin to move to opposite poles of the cell and spindle fibers form 
Metaphase: Chromosomes line up along the middle of the cell, spindle fibers attach to the centromeres, centrosomes reach opposite poles 
Anaphase: Chromatids are pulled apart from each other by the spindle fibers, they move towards the centrosomes, Chromatids become chromosomes 
Telophase: Nuclear membrane forms, and chromosomes unwind, spindle fibers disappear 

Cytokinesis: 
the splitting of the rest of the cell, organelles replicate, animal cells pinch the membrane and separate
plant cells form a cell plate in between that forms a cell wall that causes them to separate 

Cancer: Uncontrollable growth and spread of abnormal cells 
Tumour: 2 types; benign, unharmful, but can become harmful; malignant; harmful, cancerous, can spread
Cancer comes from the accumulation of genetic changes, mutations, minimum 6-9 genetic mutations 

General cell becomes specialised by turning on certain genetic code, when split the code that is on is pre-set, but if it is a stem cell, then that cell can change into anything, found in babies for growth, stem cells do not replicate, limited amount. 




Plant Cells 

Meristematic tissue: differentiates to
 1. Epidermal tissue (covers outer surface)
 2. vascular tissue (moves substance through plants)
 3. Ground tissue (supporting tissue) 

Epidermal tissue: Like the skin of the plant. Provides protection for the plant. 

Vascular tissue: Vascular tissue is comprised of the xylem (water) and the phloem (sugar), it is the main transport system of plants

Ground tissue: Ground tissue is all the other tissue in a plant that is not epidermal or vascular tissue

Plant organ system: 2 main organ systems, shoot system (above ground) and root system (below ground). The shoot system mainly transports water and nutrients and performs photosynthesis and the root system is responsible for collecting water and delivering it up the xylem. 

Shoot System: Mainly above ground, contains leave stem and flower/fruit, transport substance through plant, make flower through sexual reproduction, structural support, photosynthesis 

Leaves: main site of photosynthesis, CO2 + H2O + light energy ▶️glucose + O2  chloroplast contains thylakoids. When thylakoids are stacked, they are called granum. Chlorophyll, absorbs sunlight, lower epidermis has stomata for gas exchange, takes in carbon dioxide and water vapour, expels oxygen and water vapour, guard cells protect, monitor what come in and out, open and closes the stomata, palisade layer is where most of the photosynthesis takes place, gas exchange takes place in the spongy mesophyll 

Chloroplast: contains thylakoids, thylakoids are made of stacked grana, capture sunlight 

Stem: support of shoot system, transports water and nutrients, food storage, protection, photosynthesis

Vascular bundles: Connects the root and shoot system, contains xylem and phloem 

Xylem and Phloem: Xylem transports water and minerals (one way) mature xylem is dead, phloem transports sugars (both ways) 

Water: essential, needed to take up nutrients from the soil, too much water in soil = bad, Cohesion, sticks together so it maintains water pressure to continue being pushed up, Adhesion, sticks to other things, allows the water to not fall back due to gravity  

Roots: take up water with nutrients from soil through osmosis, root hairs increase surface area to get more water, root hairs prevent attacks on the roots from insects, roots affect movement of water through plant, called Root Pressure, when roots bring in more minerals, more mineral content in the plant, that means higher concentration of water outside than inside, and so water diffuses in by diffusion, root pressure increases and pushes water up the xylem, but this is not enough to get all the way through the plant 

Transpiration: the pull from above to pull the water the rest of the way through the plant, water enters the leaves, it is used in photosynthesis and evaporated through stomata, lack of water, pulls water up 

Types of Animal Tissue
Epithelial 
Thin covering that protects organs
Lines body cavities, covers surface of body
Skin, inside of mouth, stomach

Connective tissue
Provides support and holds body parts together
Blood is considered a connective tissue
Inner layer of skin, tendon, ligament, bone

Muscle tissue
Contract to produce different types of movement
3 types of muscle tissue
Cardiac
Heart muscle that circulates blood
(involuntary)
Skeletal
Muscle around bones
Allows you to walk
(voluntary)
Smooth
Walls of digestive tract, uterus, bladder, blood vessels, other internal organs
(involuntary)

Nervous Tissue
Allow communication between body parts
cell/tissue generate brain electrical pulses
Controlled by brain
Transported through spinal cord 

Circulatory system:
Unoxygenated blood enters through the superior vena cava (upper heart from arms and the head) and the inferior vena cava (lower heart from trunk and legs)
Enters the right atrium and fills it where it is pumped through the Right AV valve
Enters the Right ventricle and is pumped through the right semilunar valve
Goes to the lungs where it is reoxygenated through diffusion
Enters the heart through the left and right pulmonary veins
Oxygenated blood fills the left atrium
It travels through the Left AV valve
Enters the left ventricle
Is pumped through the left semilunar valve
Leaves through the Aorta, upper and lower. Upper goes to arms and head and lower goes to trunk and arms.

NOTES: When blood is first pumped, it is high pressure and then slowly decreases in pressure
	Arteries/Aorta = away from the heart
Veins = into the heart
AV valve = ATRIUM TO VENTRICLE
Left side of the heart is more muscular than the right because it needs to be stronger to pump to the whole body rather than just the lungs.

Digestive system: 
1. Mouth chews up food and swallows it and it travels down the esophagus
2. From the esophagus, it enters the stomach. Sphincters allow food to enter and exit the stomach.
3. Small intestine: nutrients diffuse into the capillaries in the walls of the small intestine
4. Large intestine: gets rid of the water and prepares it for waste (the more water the Large intestine takes in
5. Rectum: poop is stored in the rectum
6. The poop leaves through the anus

KEY ORGANS:
PANCREAS: produces insulin that regulates sugar in your blood

KIDNEYS: filters blood. produces urine

LIVER: another filter… associated with filtering alcohol

GALLBLADDER: stores bile that breaks down fat

Respiratory system
Gas exchange is possible due to DIFFUSION
Needs permeable membrane or semi-permeable membrane to work
Tight capillary/alveoli network
Only 2 thin membranes to pass through
2 way movement
Surface area is critical

Capillary function
Bring oxygen into blood (red blood cells) - Via diffusion
Remove carbon dioxide from the blood - via diffusion




Chemistry
Particle Theory:
All Matter is made of tiny particles:
Particles of matter are in constant motion 
Particles of matter held together by strong electric forces
Empty space between particles that are big in comparison to the actual particles
Each substance has unique particles, different from particles of different substances
Temperature affects the speed of particles, higher = faster, farther apart, lower = slower, closer together 

Description of matter: 9
State of matter: solid, liquid, gas 
Colour: what colour 
Odour: spicey, flowery, etc. 
Clarity: clear, cloudy, opaque 
Lustre: shiny, dull 
Texture: smooth, coarse, etc 
Brittleness: break or shatter easily? 
Malleability: can be bent, folded, shaped? 
Dictillity: can be stretched into a wire? 

Chemical characteristics: 3
Reactivity: reactive (firework), unreactive (gold) 
Toxicity: poisonous (arsenic), or harmless (water) 
Flammability: flammable (gasoline), or not burn (salt) 

Physical Change: usually just a physical characteristic change only 
Chemical Change: change results in the formation of a new substance 
Indicator of chemical change: Produce gas, formation of a precipitate, change in colour or odour, change in energy system. 

Atom: basic unit of matter, made of protons, neutrons, and electrons 

Metals: all solid except mercury, usually shiny, malleable, good conductors of heat and electricity
Alkali Metals: low melt + boil point, soft, react with water, low density 
Non-metals: many gases, bad at conduct heat and electricity 
Metalloids: metal+nonmetal properties 
Halogens: row 17, very reactive 
Noble gases: all gases, extremely stable 

Atomic Notation: ex. 3517Cl : 35 = atomic mass (all protons, neutrons, electrons) 
17 = atomic number (protons and electrons) means the left over number after (-) is neutrons
(atomic number is number of protons, and also number of electrons, not combined) 
1.Each electron has a definite amount of energy 
2. A Further electron is from the nucleus = more energy 
3. Electrons can’t exist between levels, only jump between orbitals/shells 
4. Outer most shell = Valence electrons 

Bohr Diagrams: Danish, 1913, Niels Bohr, only for first 20 elements 
Steps, 1. Determine # of electrons 
2. Draw circle for nucleus, put element symbol inside 
3. Draw shells around, period of element = number of shells 
4. 1st shell only 2 electrons, don’t pair : 2nd shell 8 electrons max, draw in pairs, same with 3rd, 4rth, max 8 electrons, don’t pair
(there is a diagram called Louis, only draw valence)

Element: a substance that cannot be broken down by chemical means, atoms contain same atomic number: 

Compounds: pure substances made of 2 or more elements, chemically combined, connection known as bond, 2 types, Ionic and covalent  
The farther away the electron is from the nucleus, means more energy, which means the valence are involved in bonding
Atoms are stable when valence shells are full, want to lose or gain electrons to become stable
Ionic: Electrons are given or taken in order to make a stable compound (full valence shell) (become + or -) + = cation - = anion (always metal and non metal)

Molecular Compounds: Electrons are shared in order to make a stable compound. Think of a butt, it is connected to make a full valence shell.

Chemical equations

Ex. H2O + CO2 → H2CO3
Water + Carbon Dioxide → Carbonic Acid

Synthesis: The combination of smaller atoms or molecules into larger atoms or molecules

A + B → AB
Zinc + Sulfur → Zinc Sulfide
Z + S → ZS

Decomposition: The combination of smaller atoms or molecules into smaller atoms or molecules

AB → A+B
H2O → H2 + O2… need to balance
2H2O → 2H2 + O2

Balancing (conservation of mass): making sure there is the same amount of each molecule/element on each side of the equation

Balancing steps: 1. Balance metals 2. Non-metals/Polyatomics 3. Hydrogens 4. Oxygens (3 and 4 are interchangeable

Single Displacement: Based on the reactivity of elements table. Metal switches with metal and non metal switches with a non metal.

AB + C → CB



Double Displacement: Both the non metals or metals switch, regardless of its reactivity
AB + CD → AD + CB

Combustion: Fuel + Oxygen → Oxides + energy 

Complete combustion: Hydrocarbon + Oxygen → Carbon Dioxide + water + energy

Incomplete combustion: Hydrocarbon + Oxygen → Carbon Dioxide + Water + Energy + Carbon + Carbon Monoxide 

pH scale: scale from 0-14 that measures acidity and basicness. 7 is neutral (water). The closer to the extremes,0 or 14, the more acidic or basic it is. Acids can be used to neutralize bases and bases can be used to neutralize acids.

Acids and bases:

Naming Acids (Binary ex.HCl, Hydrochloric Acid) 
Binary Acids: composed of two elements, hydrogen and a non-metal.  A. Root of the Non-Metal Name (i.e. fluor for fluoride) 
B. Add the prefix Hydro - to the root name 
C. Add the ending - Ic Acid  to the root name 
Examples: 
HF (aq) =  Hydrofluoric Acid
 HI (aq) =  Hydroiodic Acid 
Naming Oxoacids  
Oxoacids are composed of hydrogen, oxygen and another element (commonly a polyatomic Ion)
 
               A. Name of the anion, without the Ate or Ite ending. 
B. If the anion name ended with Ate , replace it with Ic at the end of the name.  C. If the anion name ended in Ite , replace it with Ous. 
D. Add the word Acid
Examples:  
H2SO4 (aq) = Sulfuric Acid 
H2SO3 (aq) Sufurous Acid
HNO3 (aq) =  Nitric Acid
HNO2 (aq) = Nitrous Acid





Polyatomic Ions: Compounds that exist with a charge (ammonium is the only one with a positive charge)



Diatomic Ions
Atoms that cannot exist on their own. They need 2. HOFBrINCl the clown.
Hydrogen, Oxygen, Fluorine, Bromine, Iodine, Nitrogen, Chlorine

Physics 
Light: we can only see light that enters our eyes, we can only see light that is directed in a different direction if it reflects off of something, they path light takes is a ray, diagrams that show lights movement are called ray diagrams 
Light: Light is a type of energy our eyes are sensitive to (Operational definition, only tells us how we detect light, and not what light is) 
Light travels in straight lines, this is called rectilinear propagation 

Newton first noted that white light breaks into the colours of the rainbow when it passes through a prism, the colours are known as a Spectrum, when white light comes from the sun and gets broken down, its spectrum is red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and violet, to remember order ROY G BIV 

Those coloured lines could not be broken down further, they are pure colours identified by frequency and wavelength numbers 

 Conceptual Definition of Light: the atoms in sources that produce light are surrounded by electrons that can be excited to higher energy levels, when these electrons fall back to their original energy level, they give off energy in the form of light
Many ways for atoms to gain energy 
Eg, incandescent is the emission of light through heat, the 
Atoms gain energy by being heated 

Can’t hear some sounds in the same way we cant see some colours
For example, if an iron is on and hot, we cannot see it, but we can feel the heat, the “colour” is called infrared radiation, similarly, if we were to heat water in a microwave, we would not be able to see the colour of the heat that the water is absorbing, that is called microwave radiation

Visible light spectrum is the small part of a very large spectrum known as the electromagnetic system, 



Atoms in a Luminous Object emit light rays in every direction produced by other light source, and a Non-Luminous Object will scatter the light from the Luminous Object in every direction 

Rays of light travel from the object to the viewers eyes through a medium, a transparent medium allows almost all rays to pass through unaltered, air is a transparent medium, Opaque scatter the light, making the light rays unable to pass through (text book), Translucent will scatter most of the light, you can see the outline of the shape through it, but not the details (wax paper) 

Two eyes can determine the distance of an object better because it can triangulate on the position, this is called depth perception 

The apparent Size of the object depends on the angle of the light rays coming from the top and bottom of the object, the larger the angle the larger the object appears to be, can trick the eye easily 

Concave/convex mirrors: concave: parallel to F, to vertex bounces at same refracted angle, F to parallel, through C comes right back, want to know, size, inversion, location, type, the same with convex, but behind the mirror 

Biconvex (converging): Parallel through to F, Through F to Parallel, through vertex, straight through 
Biconcave (Diverging): Parallel goes to up, if back track it goes through the F on the objects side, through vertex goes straight through, going to F on the other side becomes parallel 

1/f = 1/di  + 1/do        hi / ho = -di  / do 
Refraction: the bending and changing of light when it passes through a medium, caused by the change in the light’s speed, can change when there is an increase or decrease in speed

Incident Ray: the light ray approaching 
Reflective Ray: the ray that bounces off a surface 
Incident Angle (i): The angle created between the incident ray and normal 
Reflective Angle (r): The angle created between the reflective ray and normal 
Refracted Ray: The ray that is bent upon entering another medium 
Refracted Angle (R): The angle between the refracted ray and normal 

Through a Slower Medium the ray will bend Towards the Normal
Through a Faster Medium the ray will bend Away from the Normal



Index of Refraction: is the Ratio of the speed of light through the vacuum of space and the speed of light through a specific medium 

Speed of Light: 3.00 x 108m/s 

(will be provided) n = c/v (n = index) (c = speed of light through a vacuum) (v = speed of light through a medium) 
Climate Change 
JUST LOOK AT YOUR CHEAT SHEET!!!!!