Nathan Fung
10/30/2023
ENG3U
Mrs. S. Choi

Injustice from Police Brutality

	In the non-fiction text Seven Fallen Feathers, investigating journalist Tanya Talaga highlights many cases of systemic racism. As well as articles from the Indigenous Foundation written by Meera Baswan which gives more statistical approaches into the brutality Indigenous peoples face. The second article is from CBC News written by Logan Turner which gives more testimonials of the encounters that the Indigenous people had with police. The ongoing issue regarding police brutality directed towards Indigenous people has been going on for the past 200 years due to continued mistrust because of police ignorance and mistreatment of Indigenous peoples. The things happening go against the basic law of human rights. The sources provided have given testimonies and specific statistics of how the people have been mistreated due to the brutal acts of police that are linked with systemic racism.
	In Tanya Talaga’s book Seven Fallen Feathers, acts of police brutality are provided in the text. It shows the challenges faced by teens attending public and residential schools. In the case of Robyn Harper, she was out drinking, but through the acts of the police and the ignorance by people around her, she died (Talaga, 2021, p.188). When Robyn was drunk and walking around, she and her friends were  stopped by a police vehicle. Her friend Skye was not drunk and asked what was happening, with this the police responded with this: “Suddenly he was handcuffing her and yanking her long hair back. He spun her around and slammed her head against the top of the police car. When he pulled her up, she remembers seeing a dent where he’d smashed her head” (Talaga, 2018, p.188).Without the concern of anything, the police used brute force that could possibly have killed her on the spot. The reason for the brute force used by the police is unjustifiable as evident from the cases in Seven Fallen Feathers.
	While police brutality is happening, the media fails to accurately portray the true horror of what the Indigenous peoples experience. This leads to the ignorance of Canadians because of the media. Just recently in November 2022, CBC News interviewed Semerling. He was an indigenous man who had an encounter with the police. He was minding his own business then all of a sudden he was jumped by the police. “‘The police pulled up onto the sidewalk. His camera was turned off. His radio wasn’t working, so he beat me, and then said that I was combative and that he could have charged me with assault’, said Semerling” (Turner, 2023). The reason for the attack from the police was nonsensical. Without any reason, Semerling was attacked. What's more is that the police officer purposely turned off all evidence so that Semerling cannot prove anything against him. In this case, the police purposely hid it from the media and showed how things could have gone even worse without any identification of how it happened.
	As well as the media being tampered with, many cases of ignorance by government officials have also shown prejudice. At one point, there were 54 reported complaints of police brutality, but only one officer was charged for it. According to Meera Baswan’s article giving statistics of police brutality, Indigenous women are a large target of systemic racism from surrounding communities and from police. Baswan states that 16% of female homicide victims are Indigenous. 45% of the Indigenous female population are framed and put in jail, of those percentages, the female Indigenous population only takes up 4% in Canada (Baswan, 2021) These numbers show the oppression the Indigenous people face because of police injustice, bias, and discrimination. These statistics have proven that police brutality appears not only through physical harm but through injustice and the judicial systems.
While numbers of police brutality grows and is ignored, the distrust between the Indigenous and the settlers/police grows as well. A police’s job is to represent and protect the people of Canada, but as far as Indigenous people groups go, this is not so. “The police did nothing but stand as thousands of Indigenous children were forced into residential schools” (Baswan, 2021).Where is the protection from the police? Where was the consideration of the children? There were none. They simply ignored the Indigenous community and turned a blind eye on the things happening and even adding more oil to an already massive flame of distrust. A woman in New Brunswick was shot and killed during a “wellness check” on June 4, 2020. The distrust seems to be fueled even more because of what the people are facing from the police. As racial injustice grows, so does the distrust between the two groups.
	Throughout the many years that Canada has existed, the idea of systemic racism towards Indigenous peoples seems to increase. Police brutality rooted in systemic racism continues to exist. Indigenous peoples suffer from police brutality in physical and mental ways. Some things are not seen but it still happens. The court of justice becomes the court of injustice towards the Indigenous peoples of Canada. The ignorance that is brought forth can be seen in so many ways as well as racial bias in media and prejudice. The racism directed towards Indigenous peoples needs to end.

Works Cited:
Baswan, M. (2022, July 26). Police brutality against Indigenous Women in Canada. The Indigenous Foundation. https://www.theindigenousfoundation.org/articles/policebrutality

Talaga, T. (2021). Seven fallen feathers: Racism, death, and hard truths in a Northern City. Scribe Publications. 

Turner, L. (2023, April 28). Indigenous people in Thunder Bay, ont., Detail Violent Encounters with police in human rights complaints | CBC News. CBCnews. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/thunder-bay/john-semerling-ryan-dougherty-siu-charges-1.6824929 


 


