Doctrine of Sin Part 1
“Sin” and its Implications
The term “sin” is a term that is borrowed from the sport of  archery (see picture below).  Any failed attempt by an archer to hit the target was referred to as a “sin.”

Therefore, it follows that in regards to sin, missing the mark by a little or missing the mark by a lot is still sin.   This is because the “target,” as it were, is nothing but the glory and the perfection of God.  God is the standard by which we will be judged!
More than this, the Bible goes so far as to say that if we break one of God’s commandments, we have broken all of them.  Consider James 2:10:  “For whoever keeps the whole law and yet stumbles at just one point is guilty of breaking all of it.”
Adam & Eve’s Primal Rebellion - Origin of Sin and Death
1.Read Genesis 2:15-17.  What was the command that God gave to Adam?  What would be the result if Adam disobeyed? 

2.  Read the serpent’s temptation in Genesis 3:1-5.   What are two specific doubts that Satan placed into Eve’s mind?  	
a.
b.

3.  Read Eve’s response to the serpent’s question in Genesis 3:3 and contrast it with God’s original command in Genesis 2:17.  

5.  What is the "blessing of promise" that comes before the cursing of Adam and Eve?

6. What the consequences of disobedience give in the curses?  

7.  Who provides for their nakedness?  What is involved in this covering?  


8. What is one question you have from this text? 


So when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be desired to make one wise, she took its fruit and ate, and she also gave some to her husband who was with her, and he ate. (Genesis 3:6)  

4. In our parent’s primal act of rebellion what have they ultimately done? Consider James 2:10:  “For whoever keeps the whole law and yet stumbles at just one point is guilty of breaking all of it.”











Sin & The Character of God
In 2 Samuel 11, we read the account of King David’s adulterous affair with Bathsheba and his successful scheme to murder her husband, Uriah.  When Nathan, the prophet confronts David regarding his sin, David is overcome with remorse and prays a prayer of repentance recorded in Psalm 51.  In that prayer, David has the audacity to say to God, “Against you, you only have I sinned and done what is evil in your sight.” (vs. 4).  This despite the fact that David envied another man’s wife, stole another man’s wife, lied to Uriah, committed adultery with Bathsheba, had Uriah murdered.  5. How can David then say that it was against God and God only that he had sinned?

6. Complete the chart below, provide the character of God that is revealed in the commandment.  

OT LAW - 1. God comes first     2. People come before things   3.  Needs come before rights 
God is ALWAYS the most offended party when I sin.