CHV2O Test 3 Review

Define what a right and equal right is and is not
Right - A legal or natural entitlement to have something or to do something without interference 
Rights are not demands, wants, personal goals, desires, or wishes 
Equal Rights - The idea that all citizens are entitled to the same rights equally 
Equal Rights are meant to protect individuals and groups from injustice/discrimination 

Differences between rights and human right
Rights are determined by a nation or society and are protected by laws. Human rights do not come from any specific country and are given to everyone upon birth

What is Injustice?
Misuse of power and privilege found in a formal process and institution 

What is the Universal Declaration of Human Rights? 
When was it created? 1948 by the United Nations
What does it outline? Outlines essential characteristics for peace, freedom, and justice in the world 
Which countries follow it? All 193 member states of the UN 
What is its purpose? Reject all forms of discrimination, equality before the law 

Positive Rights vs Negative Rights
Positive Right - What everyone is entitled to have (access to healthcare, equal treatment under the law) 
Negative Right - What cannot be taken away from anyone (free speech, right to own property)

What are group rights? 
Rights claimed by groups of individuals who share common unchangeable features 
Be able to provide examples 
Indigenous peoples, ethnic minority groups. women, children, people with disabilities
Why are group rights important?
Each group holds specific rights separate from the rights of individuals. They help mitigate the pattern of discrimination against them as they are not always treated equally. 

Why is it important to protect rights?
Having rights means there is a responsibility to protect them for the common good, rights are violated everyday. It is our civic duty to protect our rights as there is no guarantee that they will not be taken away. 
What is the “Common Good”
Common Good - Something that is beneficial to the community as a whole 

3 Major roles of Government
Provide the parameters for everyday behavior for citizens, protect them from outside interference, provide for their well being and happiness

4 quadrants of the Political Spectrum
Think of each parties view on various topics (refer to chart)
Left - Right, Progressive - Conservative 
Left wants more taxes and government benefits, right wants less taxes and government benefits 

Purpose of a multilevel Government
To meet the needs of citizens who live in vastly different regions and have diverse needs.

Three levels of Government?
Who is their appointed leader?
Federal Government - Government of Canada: Prime Minister (Justin Trudeau, Canada)
Provincial Government - 10 provinces+3 territories: Premier (Doug Ford, Ontario)
Municipal Government - City, town and districts: Mayor (Frank Scarpitti, Markham)

Levels of Band Councils (Elected Local Governments by First Nations)
Chief - Registered Band Members
Grand Chief - 2 or more bands, regional
National Chief - National

Responsibilities of Municipal, Provincial, and Federal Government
Municipal - Animal control, emergency services, garbage and sewage, land-use planning, public transit, water
Provincial - Education, health, environment, property and civil rights, highways
Federal - Aboriginal affairs, citizenship, immigration, fisheries, foreign affairs, national defense, shipping/railways

Three Branches of Government?
What are each responsible for?
Legislative Branch: Power to make laws, represent citizens interest in government debate and pass new laws, monitor government policies and actions
Executive Branch: Power to administer laws, set government policy, initiate and draft new laws, administer, implement, and enforce laws/policies
Judicial Branch: Power to apply laws, interpret and apply laws through court cases and decisions, and strike down laws that are unconstitutional
2 ways it is beneficial 
The 3 branches help to protect Canadians from concentrations of political power and privilege

Canada’s Federal Political System Flow-Chart




















3 Features of First-Past-the-Post System
No limit of candidates, most votes wins, majority not required for victory

3 Reasons people are not voting
Not interested, too busy, can’t decide

8 steps of the electoral process
Step 1 - Electoral Districts 
Step 2 - Candidates 
Step 3 - Election Campaign 
Step 4 - Voting 
Step 5 - Counting Votes 
Step 6 - Forming Government 
Step 7 - Government Leader
Step 8 - Cabinet

Majority vs Minority government
Majority Government - First place party wins 158 seats/308 or 51%, second place party becomes official opposition, party A does not need the support of other parties 
Minority Government - First place party wins the most seats, but less than 158 or lower than 51%, second place party becomes official opposition, party A needs the support of other parties 

Three types of voters - Responsible, dogmatic, popular opinion voters
Campaign Tactics that would be effective to gain their support
Responsible - Political image, political polling, political events
Dogmatic -Political promises, political favors, negative campaigning
Popular Opinion -News and media, internet and social media, political advertising

What is Fundamental Justice?
Basic and essential justice that is fair and reasonable
What is Systemic Injustice?
When basic processes and institutions are in place, but create injustice

Two types of Disputes - Criminal Law (serious and harmful conduct, threat to all of society) Civil Law (Settling disputes between individuals or groups)
Examples of each - Murder, assault, divorce, contracts

Criminal Law Procedure (Trial)
Person charged is called the accused or defendant, a defense attorney fights for the rights of the accused, crown attorney represents the society and is given the responsibility of proving that the accused is guilty beyond reasonable doubt, the crown attorney does not represent the victims of the crime, judgment is done by a judge or jury based on the facts and what the law says should happens when someone breaks it, a jury’s decision must be unanimous to be found guilty, if the accused is found guilty, the judge will determine the appropriate punishment.

Civil Disputes 
Torts, labor law, family law, estate law, property law, contract law

Ways voting has changed over time - Requirements for voting has changed 
Before: 21 years+, own land, caucasian male, able-bodied, relative in the military 
Now: Canadian citizen, 18 years+, on the voter’s list 
History of Voting - More people can vote
Caucasian women, Asian Canadians, Inuit, First Nations (without losing Indian status), 18 year olds, homeless, and federal prisoners can vote 

Why is paying taxes a responsibility as a good citizen?
So the government can continue providing necessary/valuable services for everyone. If we all chose not to pay taxes we would not be able to have those benefits. They pay for many important services. 

What is the purpose of the citizenship oath? 
To uphold the laws of Canada and commit people to fulfill the duties of citizenship
What are its flaws?
It does not prevent all people from committing crimes or ensure all people pay taxes