The Doctrine of SIN Part 2


                   The First Adam                                   The Second Adam
                                          









          






In Luke 3, Luke records the genealogy of Jesus all the way to Adam, our first father.  When he introduces Adam, he describes Adam as the “son of God.”  So, Adam by virtue of being the first human created is also known as “the son of God.”  Jesus Christ, is the true “Son of God” though.  Interestingly, in Romans 5 and 1 Corinthians 15, Jesus is depicted as the second or the final Adam.  So you have the first Adam aka “the son of God.”  And you have the true Son of God aka “the second Adam.”

The first Adam, the “son of God,” disobeyed his Father regarding a tree and his disobedience brought sin and death into the world.  The second Adam, the true son of God obeyed his Father regarding a tree (the cross) and brought salvation and life into the world.  One son dishonoured his Father; the other honoured His Father even to the point of death.

Timeline 


Total Depravity

The theological term to describe humanity’s state before we are saved is Totally Depraved.  This does not mean that we are as bad as we could possibly be.  You could be worse.  It means that every part of who you are has been corrupted, scarred and tainted by sin. What aspects of God’s image are affected by sin?  






         Before the Fall			 Because of the Fall		            God’s ambition for you
                     

Complete this chart by identifying what the implications are for each of the statements.  Give particular attention to what the death of Jesus Christ would have accomplished if the statement were true.
Sin & Sinners

Concluding Words on Sin: Sin is another name for that hideous rebellion, that God-defiance, that wretched opposition to the Creator that crouches at the door of every fallen human heart.
Look up the following verses and provide what we learn about sin. 
(Rom. 5:12–21, Jas. 1:15)  

(1 John 3:4, Rom. 3:23)  

(Col. 3:5; 1 John 5:21, Ezek. 16:15–42)  (Ezek. 16:15–42).

( Rom. 3:9–20)  

And sin is the problem of the universe.  The redemptive story of the Bible does not make sense without it.
