ENG3U
ISU

Independent Study Project
Essential question (EQ): How can I engage in critical hope and use language to bring transformation?

Read one of the approved books. Then, complete two small assignments and your ISP (a short film, an art show, a short story, a 1-act play, a children’s book, or a graphic novel). The ISP is worth 10% of your ENG3U mark. 

Estimated Time Breakdown: Total 15 hours

Part 1:  Review 	    	(12/21)                          	/10
In a single page, double spaced paper, review the book. Students must respond specifically to all of the following in the review (Please use the bolded subheadings on your paper):
 
RPrecis: Write a brief rhetorical precis for the book.  (K/U & A: 4 marks)
Effective: Is the text an effective example of storytelling? Why/not?	(T: 2 marks)
Experience: What did you take away from the text?   (A: 2 marks)
Recommend: Would you recommend this text? Why or why not?       	(A: 2 marks)
 
Part 2:  Plan     	(12/21)                          	/10
Create a detailed outline for your ISP. We will share this in class. Get some feedback from peers regarding content, form, and your project’s connection to the EQ.

Outline your ISP--this will look different depending on the product you have chosen to create (storyboard, comic panels, art sketches, plot diagram + character sketches + MWOW, etc.) 
(T & A: 10 marks)


Part 3:  	The ISP (Creative Product)             	(1/15)                         	/110
Students will create a short film, an art show, a short story, a 1-act play, a children’s book, or a graphic novel to answer the essential question of the course: How can I engage in critical hope and use language to bring transformation? 

The ISP should demonstrate the student’s understanding of the course texts and ideas as well as the skills learned in class (e.g.: critical thinking, literary analysis, close reading, the writing process, planning, reflection, writing for various purposes/audiences and speaking for various purposes/audiences). 

In addition to your product (see rubric), write a concise and well-written paragraph, where you make specific connections between your planned ISP and the book and explain how your project answers the essential question. (A & C: 10 marks)
 
ENG3U
ISP Rubric 
Essential Question: How can I engage in critical hope and use language to bring transformation?

 
/100
Book List

Please note that while these are books that have been pre-approved on my end for you to choose for our class purposes, you must also make sure that your parent/guardian approves of your reading your chosen book. Several of the books below have mature scenes and themes or explicit language (I tried to mark these with an asterisk, but do your own research). Do a bit of digging on Goodreads and other similar sites to check for triggers.

Also, please consider donating your book to our class for a future ENG3U library once you have finished reading it!

*The Handmaid’s Tale - Margaret Atwood
*Kindred - Octavia Butler
*Night - Elie Wiesel
*The Namesake - Jhumpa Lahiri
*Beloved - Toni Morrison
*East of Eden - John Steinbeck
*Of Mice and Men - John Steinbeck
A Tale of Two Cities - Charles Dickens
The Razor’s Edge - William Somerset Maugham
Pride and Prejudice - Jane Austen
Notes from the Underground - Fyodor Dostoevsky
The Brothers Karamazov - Fyodor Dostoevsky
Persepolis - Marjane Satrapi
Gilead - Marilynne Robinson
*Pachinko - Min Jin Lee
*There There - Tommy Orange
Moneyball - Michael Lewis
*The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time - Mark Haddon
*The Fifth Season - NK Jemisin
*The Road - Cormac McCarthy
*Between the World and Me - Ta-Nehisi Coates
*Educated - Tara Westover
Animal Farm - George Orwell
War and Peace - Leo Tolstoy
The Crucible - Arthur Miller
Death of a Salesman - Arthur Miller
Les Miserables - Victor Hugo
The Tempest - William Shakespeare

