







Fetal Pig Dissection


























Alex He
Partner: Misia Lui
SBI3U
Grade 11 Biology
April 29th, 2024
Mrs. Stella Tam
Introduction

The purpose of this experiment, the dissection of the fetal pig, is for a student to learn the anatomy of several bodily systems of an animal, including the respiratory, digestive, and circulatory systems. The reason why a fetal pig was used in this case is because the anatomy of a fetal pig is actually quite similar to a human body, and therefore can be used as a substitute to educate students about physical anatomy. A fetal pig is a pig that was not yet born, but is developed enough so that the organs are present. A dissection is to open up the specimen in order to analyze its internal anatomy, which is exactly what was done in this experiment. 

Materials

For safety and hygiene purposes, these materials and gear were used:

Lab Apron
Goggles
Gloves
Mask
Hair tie

Tools used during the experiment:

Scalpel
Tweezers
Scissors
T-pins
Probes
Dissection Tray
Newspaper
Fetal Pig




Methods

The method used and followed  in this experiment is found in the Nelson Biology 11 textbook (pgs. 506-511)

Changes in the Method:

Incisions were made to the top of the head at the end of the experiment after the procedure found in the textbook was completed. This was an attempt to take out the brain of the fetal pig and analyze it, as with the other organs. First, an incision was made at the top of the head of the fetal pig in order to cut the skin and skull. Then, tweezers were used to separate the skin and the pieces of bone, which would reveal the brain. The supposed third step was to carefully remove the brain using our hands. But, due to poor technique on the second step , the incision made went too deep into the head of the fetal pig, which saw the blade go right through the brain. The tweezers that were supposed to pry the bone and skin apart also went too deep into the incision, which when moved around in attempts to pry the bone and skin apart, tore the brain apart, rendering it useless and impossible to take out in one piece. 
The experiment happened over a course of 2 days, in total about 3 hours

Safety Considerations:

Before the experiment:
Prior to the dissection on both days, experimenters were dressed in a plastic lab apron to prevent chemicals from spilling onto clothing, and put on latex gloves to protect the skin of the hands, goggles to protect the eyes, optionally a mask to prevent inhaling of chemicals and foul smells, and experiments with longer hair had their hair tied up. 

During the experiment:
All tools were handled with care to ensure the safety of the experimenter and their partner. All tools, as well as the fetal pig (clamped down onto a tray using T-pins), were handled very carefully. Scalpels and scissors, and other sharp tools were pointed AWAY from any experimenters. There was no drinking or eating while the experiment was being conducted, and there was no horseplay nor running around the classroom during the experiment. 

After the experiment: After the experiment on the first day, the tray containing the dissected fetal pig was carefully placed into a plastic bag. On the second day after the procedure was finished, the fetal pig was disposed of into a garbage bag along with the other fetal pigs. All of the tools were rinsed with water and soap, before being laid out to dry. After each day, the gloves and apron were both disposed of. The glasses were put away. Finally, the work area was carefully cleaned, ensuring no parts of the pig nor chemicals were left behind. 

Results

Diagrams of Systems Attached
Observations of organs and tissues also attached


Discussion/Analysis

There are several key differences between the fetal pig’s mouth structure and the human mouth structure. First, the mouth of a fetal pig is much longer and narrower than a human’s. This could be because since pig’s cannot use their limbs to eat, it would be easier for them to pick up food using a longer face and head so food does not get into the eyes or nose while eating. Second, the fetal pig’s teeth were not very visible during the procedure. This can be due to them having a very short life and therefore not enough time for their teeth to develop. Finally, the tongue of the fetal pig is much longer, darker, and slimmer than a human tongue. The crooked shape could have been because the pig was sitting in chemicals for a while, but the length could be due to the extended skull and face of the fetal pig. 
The digestion process of a fetal pig is almost exactly the same as a human. When food enters the mouth, saliva and chemicals in the mouth lubricate the food, and the teeth found in the mouth grind and break down the food into smaller pieces. The tongue pushes the food into the esophagus. Then, the food passes through the esophagus into the stomach, where the muscles and chemicals break down the food even further. Food then passes into the small intestine, where most nutrients are absorbed into the bloodstream. Then, the remains are sent to the large intestine, where the remaining nutrients are collected and feces is created. Feces is then sent to the rectum, where it is stored until it is finally expelled out of the anus. 
Despite being separate systems, the respiratory and circulatory systems are interconnected in many ways. One of the most important ways is the transfer of oxygen and carbon dioxide. Oxygen enters the lungs (respiratory system) through inhalation, and is diffused into the bloodstream. The blood passes through the heart and around the body, and along the way collects waste and carbon dioxide, which passes through the heart again, into the lungs, and is exhaled out of the body. Movement of gasses is one of the most important processes that sustains the body of both humans and fetal pigs. 
Another pair of systems that are interconnected are the digestive and circulatory systems. One of the ways these two systems are interconnected is waste transfer and removal. Blood in the circulatory system carries some produced waste to the digestive system from all around the body, so that it can be expelled through the digestive system. 


Conclusion
The conduction of the lab has helped a student to understand the functions of several organs and organ systems. This lab has provided students with understanding of how bodily processes happen in mammals, including processes such as movement of blood, food, and gasses. By the dissection, the student has applied their knowledge from lectures into a real-life study and application by analyzing the different parts of the body studied in lectures. Because the body of a fetal pig is so similar to a human, this greatly increases the student’s understanding of their own bodily systems, which allows them to further appreciate their incredible anatomy and biology. 

This experiment and research is important to the real world because 1, it is absolutely imperative that science students study anatomy of animals in order to fully understand and appreciate how systems were so magically formed and perfectly created. Second, this research can help a student understand how a body functions, which is important as to open the eyes of a student to how complex and fascinating the body really is. And finally, the understanding of animal systems allows students to understand a deeper connection between humans and animals. 









