 ENGLISH
/20 long answer (reflecting on how you perceive justice today)
/15 T/F
/14 multiple choice
/14 sight passage
/12 making connections to literary works
/38 short answer
/18 storyboardings 

Short stories

Fish Cheeks:
Amy likes the WHITE minister's son
Her parents invite minister’s family for dinner
She is anxious because she doesn’t want her culture to seem weird to him
She is ashamed of her culture’s food
Amy wants to seem less chinese
Her parents are proud of their culture
During dinner, Amy’s family follows chinese culture and shows the minister the culture
The minister tries to follow their culture out of respect
After they leave Amy’s mom gives her a mini-skirt, but still wants Amy to not forget her culture

main idea: culture is something you should be proud of but it is hard for children of immigrant parents to cling to it. They may be embarrassed or ashamed of their culture.

Dinner Party:
In India 
Colonial official and his wife has dinner with guest 
Army officers, Government attachés and their wives, and a visiting American nationalist are there 
A young girl says women aren’t stereotypical girly type anymore, colonel disagrees 
Says sexist stuff about women always screaming and running when there is danger, and that the man must step up, they have more nerve control than women he says
Hostess seems strange, very still and tense, she gestures the native servant boy over and whispers in his ear. 
he gasps and leaves, he brings back milk, American notices this and knows that a bowl of milk in India is used to lure out a snake. He looks for the cobra all around the house and can’t find it. He realizes that it must be under the table
Instead of screaming, the american tells the government attaches and army officers that they should test their control over themselves through a no moving game in a certain amount of time, winning money if they don’t move 
The american counts until 280 when he sees the snake out of the corner of his eye, going for the bowl of milk 
He runs to slam the door shut. Screams ring out as the guests notice the snake, he closes the door on the snake who fell for the milk bait 
The host praises the colonel that he was right, a perfect example of a man being in control
But the American asks how the hostess knew of the snake, she says it was crawling on her foot

main idea: women who are generally seen as weak and with less control over their emotions are just as capable as men. Sexism is an idea that is spread. The host is influenced by the colonel’s ideas about men having more control over dangerous situations. 

On the Sidewalk Bleeding: 
Boy bleeding on rainy sidewalk, 16, part of ROYALS gang, Andy, March, fighting Guardians gang, 
While lying thinking of girlfriend and if she is ok, Laura, wish to marry her and leave
Drunk man comes, thinks Andy is drunk, ignores him and walks away, not helping 
Couple come, Freddie and Angela, don’t notice at first, see him and want help, see he is a ROYAL, don’t want to get caught by GUARDIANS, they ignore and leave him 
Anddy not scared of Guardians, thinking more of Laura, when was ROYAL, had meaning 
Who was he, stabbed for being ROYAL, did even think he was a person, he was Andy 
What good is a title if he’s dead, old lady come and gone, a little deaf, used umbrella 
No want die, haven’t lived yet, only 16, purple jacket not important 
He want take off jacket, don’t want to be seen as a ROYAL, but as Andy 
He struggles and finally takes it off, then dies, Laura finds him past midnight, left dance 
Cop comes, “a ROYAL huh”, gf his name is andy, cop, “A ROYAL”, failed at want be self

Main idea: Your identity is usually rooted in what you are associated with but not who you were as a person. You will be forgotten for who you were but remembered for what you did. 

No new land:
Mr. Rogers of Eaton, big boned
Immigrant wants to work at fancy shoe store but the hiring manager says no, he has an idea of what an employee should look like (white and rich)

Main idea: Racism isn’t only a personal issue but more societal because it isn’t the manager’s fault that people would more likely buy from a white and rich person. 

Scars:
The main character, Daniel, was watching his dad dismantle a car
He doesn’t like watching him do this because it reminds him of his brother who can fix anything and died of a disease
He was watching his dad cut the car with an axe
Then he was struck by the axe
His dad quickly drove him to the hospital
Daniel likes breaking his glasses
His dad went to park the car as they went to the hospital
He saw the fear in his mom’s eyes because she was scared that he would die
He compares his situation to when his brother was in the hospital
The doctor disinfected the wound and then froze it
Daniel is wondering where is dad is
When he gets his stitches done, he sees his dad breaking his glasses because the dad was upset

Main idea: Many men don’t know how to show emotions, specifically sadness. This is generational and boys learn it from their parents. 

Dear Martin
Theme of racism
Justyce faces a lot of discrimination in speech and even violence 
Prejudice
Plot: Boy, black, named Justyce, in the beginning helping ex named Melo who is drunk, racist cop uses excessive force, Justyce gets punched and arrested unjustly. Justice is writing letters to Martin Luther King Junior as a social experiment, like a diary. Is a part of the debate club with some friends. Close with the teacher. Best friend Manny, friends with some white guys, they are kinda racist. They have the “brilliant idea” of dressing as stereotypes. Justice as a gangster, one of the white guys is dressed as a KKK member. They go to a party, a guy dressed in KKK named Blake says some racist stuff, a black man at the party punches him. Justyce realizes he’s hanging with a very bad crowd… has to “pick between white or black” Later Justice gets into Uni early acceptance, Jared gets upset, blaming affirmative action (Giving minorities a spot in order to be inclusive) and saying “If i see a minority, ill wonder if they’re qualified” ,. Later on, it is Blake’s birthday, Justyce and Manny show up, Blake says something racist, Justyce gets mad, Jared and Black poke fun at him, some lowkey racist stuff is said. Justyce, drunk, gets angry and beats up both Blake and Jared. Manny holds Justyce back, and tells him he’s overreacting. Manny hangs out with them later. They continue to be racist, and when Manny calls them out on it, they say the same thing Manny said to Justyce. Manny quits the basketball team, and Jared says “I couldn’t until Massas set me free”. Manny gets so angry he beats him up. Justyce and Manny talk about that. Next morning Manny and his family are supposed to go hiking. Turns out Jared’s parents are charging him for assaulting Jared. Hiking cancelled, now just gonna drive around with Justyce and vent. Driving with music blasting, stop at a light and a white guy stops next to them, shoots them an angry look. They turn down the music, but turn it back up when they continue driving. At the next light the same guy stops and shouts at them to turn down the music. Manny gets mad, and says that he’s done bending his actions for white people. The white man calls them racist slurs and Manny gets angrier and reaches to turn up the volume. Three shots are fired and Manny is shot in the head and Justyce is shot in the arm. Funeral for Manny. SJ there, they talk. Visit Gang member Quan Banks in jail. Almost joins the gang, talks about how they tried the nice way, which led to Manny’s death. Can’t escape the black man’s curse. Trial to be set, Officer Garrett lies, says they tried to pull out a gun. People believe him, they are mad, saying Justyce is pulling the race card. Trial date not set yet. Juustyce confesses to SJ, and someone sets fire to Officer Garrett’s house. Questioned about the fire, not Justyce, at Sj’s house, talks to mom later about SJ. Now at trial. The picture from halloween is shown to paint Justyce as a thug, and they also talk about Manny beating up Jared, and Justyce punching Jared and Blake. They do not give the full context, and it seems much worse. While pending on what his punishment will be, Garrett is killed in his cell. Later we see Jared changed, and Justyce happy. 

theme
Choices vs. Fate. 
Justice, Racial Bias, and Growing Up.
Identity, Support, and Community. 
Family, Loyalty, and Belonging. 
Survival, Poverty, and Violence.

Major events
Justyce is arrested unfairly 
Justyce wins the debate
Justyce and SJ like each other
Manny killed, Justyce injured 
Manny’s friends are racist 
Get beat up by Manny and Justyce (separate occasions) 
Justyce almost joins The black Jihad gang (after Manny’s death.) 
Justyce makes up with Jared at Manny’s grave

Connections to social justice
Police brutality
Affirmative action
Racism
social injustice
interracial relationships
peer pressure
societal pressure (act black or act white)

The Book Thief
Plot: Liesel Meminger is sent with her brother to Himmel street because her mom is too poor to take care of them. It is set during the second world war, at the peak of the Holocaust. Liesel’s brother dies on the train and is buried. The gravedigger’s apprentice drops his book “the gravedigger’s handbook” and Liesel picks it up. It is her first book that she steals. She moves in with Hans and Rosa. Hans is kind and good hearted while Rosa is harsh and tough loving. She learns to read with Hans and finishes the book. Her best friend is Rudy, a boy obsessed with a black runner. Together they steal apples and try to make money in the poor conditions of Germany. Hans owes a favour to a Jewish German man he fought with in the army. He exercises this by smuggling Max, a Jewish man who ends up hiding in their basement. Liesel treats him like a brother and they write books together. A significant book was the word shaker, it reads about Liesel who uses words to influence people. 

12 Angry Men

plot: black boy on trial for his father’s murder. All the jurors believe that he is obviously  guilty except for juror 8, who believes that this boy should have the same chance as anyone else. He wants to know all the facts. There are two witnesses. A lonely old man with a limp that claims to have seen the boy rush out of the room where the murder happened. There is also a woman who claims to have heard the boy scream “i’m gonna kill you!” to his father from across the street and see the murder from across the street through the window of a loud speeding train. The main opposition is 3 (a man with issues with his children who is the most convinced that the boy is guilty… his experience with his own child is clouding his view), 7 (more concerned about missing a Yankees game than the boy’s life), and 10 (a violent racist who talks down on people from slums and is inconsistent with his ideals) The main advocates are 8 (a wise critical thinker who believe in justice), 9 (a lonely old man who wishes he did more with his life), and 11 (a European immigrant who takes his jury duty seriously and advocates for true justice because he was mistreated himself) 12 (changes his mind on the vote multiple times)

main evidences and counters

murder weapon: 
8 finds an identical knife to the one of a kind murder weapon at a pawn shop near the boy’s neighbourhood. The boy said he dropped the knife out of his pocket.
2 points out that the downward stabbing angles don’t make sense because the boy was 7 inches shorter than his dad. 3 demonstrates a way that it would make sense but 5 says switchblades are meant to be held upside down.

being caught at the scene of the crime:
11 says that it wouldn’t make sense for the boy to return to the scene of the crime if he did commit the murder. Others said it was to retrieve the knife but 11 said it would be foolish.


old man’s testimony:
 9 (a lonely old man) suggests that the old man lied because he wanted to be important for once and a part of something. 
The old man said he walked from the bed to the door in 15 seconds and saw the boy run out of the room. They notice that as the man was walking to the stand, he has a limp. 8 recreates the distance from the door to the bed and walks at the old man’s pace. it would have taken at least 42 seconds.

woman’s testimony:
The train was loud, how could she hear what the boy yelled? the train was also fast. how could she see the murder happen through the small windows of the train?
9 notices that 4 rubs his nose after wearing glasses just like the witness did. This means that the woman usually wears glasses.8 points out that it was the middle of the night and the woman would not have had her glasses on. She would not have been able to see the murder.
“i’m going to kill you”: 8 reasons that this is a phrase that is used casually without meaning that it will actually happen. 3 proves point this when he gets angry and shouts that he will kill 8

The boy was abused by his dad: 
That night, the boy was hit by his dad. They suggested that this angered the boy enough to murder him. 8 argued that if he was hit all his life, why would he snap then.

Alibi: 
The boy was unable to remember the details of his alibi, being at the movie theatre. 8 says that it was a traumatic emotional experience which can lead to forgetfulness. He asks 4 to recall the details of a movie he watched a few days ago and he was unable to remember.

psych testimony:
The foreman says a psychiatrist testified that the boy was capable of murder. 11 argues that some of the jurors could have the subconscious desire to murder
10 said psychiatry is not a real profession but uses the psychiatrist's testimony to convict the boy.

In the end, the vote is 11 to 1 with 3 being the only hold out. 3 gives a speech about how kids are rotten and will kill (stems from his own experience with his estranged  kid) 8 says “he’s not your son” and 4 tells 3 to let the kid live. 3 agrees and 8 helps 3 get his jacket. A good resolution to the conflict.

Know the significance of the role of each Juror
1 (Foreman): Short, serious, well dressed, unintelligent, makes good decisions, likes being in charge
Points out that a psychiatrist testified that the boy was capable of murder. 10 says psychiatry isn’t a valid profession. 11 points out that a few of the jurors could have the subconscious desire to kill but that doesn’t make them guilty of murder. 10 argues that the psychiatrist did testify but 8 points out that 10 is inconsistent, not seeing psychiatry as a valid profession but using the psychiatrist's testimony to prove the boy’s guilt.
2: Shy, a follower, easily changes mind based on others' opinions, no opinion of his own
Points out that the downward angle of stabbings doesn’t make sense because the boy was 7 inches shorter than his father. 3 demonstrates on 8 how it could have made sense but 5 argues that a switchblade is held underhanded.
3: Strong, forceful, humourless, strict, forces others to agree with him, forces his opinion, his opinion is right, full of himself
He is most passionate that the defendant is guilty, plays tic tac toe and jokes that the boy’s father was murdered by a baseball player. He has a son that he also hit to try to “make him a man” but is now estranged from him. He eventually gets so angry that he says that he will kill the 8th juror, which proves the 8th juror's idea that the words are tossed around loosely. Calls for a hung jury in act 2 part 2. His main argument stems from the fact that he himself has a bad relationship with his son. He ends up changing his mind when 8 tells him that “he is not your son”
4: Wealthy, presents himself well all the time, serious, only wants facts, thinks he is better than other jurors, doesn’t like the other jurors behaviours
One of the last jurors to change his mind, did not remember the details of a movie he saw a few days ago. He tells 10 to shut his filthy mouth after 10 gives a racist speech. 4 explains that he only thinks the boy is guilty because of the testimony of the woman across the street. This changes 12 back to a guilty verdict. When 3 is sharing his argument, he tells  3 to let the boy live, which helps change his mind.
5: Scared, takes his responsibility serious, afraid to speak up (especially to older people), young, not aware of the facts, oblivious
Grew up in a violent slum… sensitive to bigotry towards slum kids
6: Nice, honest, not too smart, makes decisions carefully, accepts opinions he likes, difficult to create positive opinions
Is impressed by the old man distance test.
7: Loud, wealthy, quick temper, very opinionated, bully, coward, quick opinions on things he doesn’t know anything about, being on the jury is a waste of time.
He is more concerned about the Yankees game that he is missing. He wants to go to the boardwalk. He gets angry with 11 for not knowing what “reasonable doubt” meant. He says bad things about 11’s ethnicity. Eventually changes his vote to not guilty because “he’s had enough” and this angers 11 but 7 admits he is convinced the boy isn’t guilty.
8: Quiet, a lot of opinions, considers other’s opinions, believes in true justice, seeks the truth, will fight to get what is right.
Only one to question the guilty verdict, shows an identical copy of the supposed “one of a kind knife” that he found at a pawn shop. He questions the train that passed by.. The train is loud how could the woman hear? How could she see the act through the window of a speeding train? He argues that the phrase “I’m gonna kill you” is meaningless in most situations. They also notice that the old man has a limp when he testified that he ran to the door and saw the boy run out. 8 recreates the distance from his bed to the hallway door. The old man said it took him 15 seconds while their test showed that he couldn’t have done it under 42 seconds. He also points out that because of the emotionally intense situation, the defendant would forget key details of his alibi at the movie theatre. Juror 4 disagrees until 8 asks 4 to remember details from a movie he saw a few days ago. He gets details wrong and can’t remember everything. 8 points out that the woman wouldn’t have been able to see the boy without her glasses and she wouldn’t have had them on since it was the middle of the night. This convinces the 12 juror to switch his vote back to not guilty. 10 also changes his vote because he is outnumbered. Now it is only 3 that believes he is guilty. When asked for 3’s argument, he calls the other bleeding hearts and believes that he is a rotten kid and that kids can kill you each day. 8 tells him that the boy is not his son. 4 tells 3 to let him live. When they leave to go to the jury box, 8 brings 3 his jacket and helps him put it on. 
9: Nice old man, lives his life strong, does not hide his age, does not hold back on his decisions, wishes he was more courageous when younger, defeated by life, waiting to die
Highly observant of the witnesses’ behaviours and possible motivations… suggests that the old man who “witnessed” the boy run out could have been lying to seek validation and solve his loneliness. Later on when discussing the woman who testified, 9 notices that 4 rubs his nose when he took off his glasses just like the woman did.
10: Angry, miserable racist, hates everyone but himself, knows his life is going nowhere
Very bigoted towards those in slums, has to be physically restrained. He changes his vote later on when he sees that he is outnumbered… it is now 11-1, with 3 being the holdout.
11: Pushover, ashamed because he is a refugee from Europe, speaks with an accent, wants justice especially since he’s been treated unfairly, compassionate.
Makes the point that if the boy had killed his father, why would he return to the scene of the crime? Others argued that he wanted to retrieve his knife but 11 argued that it would be very foolish. 

12: Full of himself, egocentric, snob, bright, does not understand people, tries to be good person
Changes his vote multiple times

Central theme of the play and its significance to other literary works
justice despite bias, finding the truth past what we see on the surface level, This relates to our other literary works because the news reporters and people on the outside did not stop to dig through the Tison case and find the absolute truth. 

Reading a passage demonstrating understanding


Cinematography
Shot angles
Eye level: Shot taken at average height (character’s eye level) It is the most natural angle.
High angle: Shot taken above the subject. Makes subject look smaller than normal, weak, powerless, trapped
Low Angle: Shot taken from below the subject. Makes subject look larger than normal, strong, powerful, and threatening
Shot types
Establishing Shot: A long shot or a series of shots. sets the scene.  This shot is used to establish the setting and to show transitions between locations. 

Long Shot (LS): A shot from some distance. If filming a person, the full body is shown. It may show the isolation or vulnerability of the character (also called a Full Shot). 

Medium Shot (MS): The most common shot. The camera is a medium distance from the object being filmed. A medium shot shows the person from the waist up. The effect is to ground the story. 

Close Up (CU): The shot image takes up at least 80 percent of the frame. 

Extreme Close-Up (ECU): The shot image is part of a whole, such as an eye or a hand. 

Two Shot: A scene between two people shot exclusively from an angle that includes both characters more or less equally. It is used in love scenes, where the interaction between the two characters is essential.

Visual FX
Forced perspective:  An illusion that makes larger objects appear to be closer to the viewer than smaller objects.
Matte: A mask that prevents light from reaching and exposing a portion of the film.
Matte painting: A painting, traditionally done on glass, of a landscape or other background that is combined with other images in the finished film.
Persistence of vision: The illusion of movement created when a series of still pictures flashes by in rapid succession.
Rear projection: A way of combining previously filmed backgrounds with live-action foregrounds.
Rotoscoping: A process that enables filmmakers to trace live-action footage frame by frame.
Shuftan Process: A method of using mirrors to combine full-scale live action and miniatures.
Split screen:  A process that combines two or more different actions, filmed separately, in the same film frame.
Travelling matte: Mattes used to combine two separately filmed scenes when the foreground element changes shape or position from frame to frame.
Physical effects: rain, wind, fire, snow, smoke, car crashes, etc.

Animatronics: Three-dimensional figures or parts powered by pumps, motors, hydraulics, computers or other electronic or mechanical means.

Prosthetics: Any three-dimensional item that is attached to an actor to change his or her appearance.
CGI (Computer Generated Imagery)

Sound
Music (instrumentals)
Songs 
SFX
Dialogue

Video editing
Must choose best acting performances and most effective camera angles and lighting

EDITING TERMS

Cut: The most common editing technique. Two pieces of film are spliced together so that the film “cuts” from one image to another. 

Fade: Can be to or from black or white. A fade can begin in darkness and gradually assume full brightness (fade-in) or the image may gradually get darker (fade-out). A fade often implies that time has passed or may signify the end of a scene. 

Dissolve: A kind of fade in which one image is slowly replaced by another. It can create a connection between images. 

Wipe: A new image wipes off the previous image. A wipe is more fluid than a cut and quicker than a dissolve. 

Flashback: Cut or dissolve to action that happened in the past. 

Shot-Reverse-Shot: A shot of one subject, then another, then back to the first. It is often used for conversation or reaction shots. 

Eye-Line Match: Cut to an object, then to a person. This technique shows what a person seems to be looking at and can reveal a character’s thoughts.

Contrast: Cutting from one scene to a drastically different scene thereby forcing the viewer to compare the scenes in their minds.

Symbolism: the introduction of an abstract concept into the consciousness of the spectator without the use of a title or the juxtaposition of two images where one image underscores/emphasizes the other image.

Cross Cutting (Simultaneity, Parallelism): Cuts between actions that are happening simultaneously. This technique is also called parallel editing. It can create tension or suspense and can form a connection between scenes. 

Leit Motif:  A leitmotif is a short, constantly recurring musical piece associated with a particular person, place, or idea.

Cutaways:  A cut away from the primary subject to something the filmmaker has decided is equally or more relevant at the time.

Jump Cut: A cut where two spliced shots do not match in terms of time or place.  A jump cut gives the effect that the camera is literally jumping around.

Reverse Cutting:  A technique alternating over-the-shoulder shots showing different characters speaking.  This is generally used in conversation scenes.

Storyboarding 
Contains any audio/dialogue in scene
Camera angle
Shot type
Panel, shows what the camera will see
Arrows to show movement, arrows around edges of panel shows camera movement… arrows in the panel usually show character movement
What visual effects are needed, physical? Cgi? Greenscreen?

Essay Question:
 In English we have learned about the many injustices that have both shaped society and still exist today. Write a personal essay that shares how your understanding of justice, its significance in society and the importance of responding to injustice has grown and shaped you over the course of this year.  Your essay should reference course readings and discussions, as well as your personal experiences and observations. Analyze the factors that shape your perspective. Consider the challenges and dilemmas associated with justice and propose ways in which individuals and communities can promote and uphold justice in their daily lives. 

(Personal pronouns are permitted)

Marking Scheme:
- Introduction: introductory statements (3 marks)
   - Introduce injustice in the world
- For each body paragraph: (5 marks per paragraph, total 15 marks)
- Examples and reflection (3 marks)
- Identification and explanation of an insight or conclusion gained (2 marks)
-Paragraph 1: How has your perspective evolved throughout this year
-Paragraph 2: How has this perspective grown and shaped you
-Paragraph 3: How can you promote and uphold justice in your daily life?

- Conclusion: concluding statements (2 marks)

Julian
Understanding of justice is having your own morals of what is right and wrong
Injustice is everywhere, seen in racism, sexism, 
As I grew older I matured and my thought process changed. My understanding from when I was younger evolved into a more complicated detailed thought about justice.
My perspective when I was younger was more simple. It shaped me because I followed my own rules of what I thought was good and bad, like stealing and lying.
Follow the laws and ask yourself if it's a good or bad thing to do.

Yi-Joon
Injustice is when something in society is unfair and unequal like racism
I always thought that all people groups are equal
Over time I realized how unfair the world is and the inequality people go through
This perspective has changed me to be more considerate about what other people are going through
Instead of antagonizing people, I try to remember how their living situation might have lead up to this
I can help promote and uphold justice by helping people who are in worse situations and living conditions
Renee

main points: the solution to systemic racism comes from within yourself. Justice is giving a voice to minorities that are affected. be an ally.

Intro: Racism and discrimination has always been a part of our world. With Europeans being the predominant race, they controlled the ideas of what was wanted in people. Physical characteristics and personality traits. This lead to death, unhealthy ideals, etc. 

I have always considered myself to be more politically correct. Compared to my parent’s older, more traditional views on race, I was the one to call out my parents on unacceptable behaviours when it came to race. I did have the occasional racist or prejudiced thoughts but brushed them off as just something that resulted from being brought up in an old fashioned way. But the truth is that I was completely unaware of my internal biases and prejudices. I thought that I couldn’t possibly be racist because I was a person of colour myself. I thought it was enough for me to not say the N word and brush off the occasional discriminatory thoughts. I blamed the thoughts on mental illnesses and such but in reality they were ideals that stemmed from my parents. But after learning about justice in terms of race and social injustices, I grew to realize that i was not going my part. I now know that it is my responsibility to rid of the generational racism that is embedded in our society, starting with me.

After this enlightenment, the main thing I did was to check my thoughts. Countering them with the truth and focusing on why they came up in the first place. I believe that humans are inherently discriminatory with judgemental and evil thoughts. But by countering my thoughts and not letting those thoughts affect my actions or speech, I believe that I will be able to keep myself accountable. Speech is something that most people don’t think about. How the words we say can hurt others and promote dangerous ideas. I have been trying to avoid racist jokes or micro aggressive statements, even towards my own race. I realized that I should not be spreading these negative messages, whether it be stereotypes or slurs (pertaining to my own race) it is not helpful at all to be said. These are just some things that I have been working on changing. My perspective has changed and I believe that change, when it comes to social injustices and racism, starts from within yourself. 

Promoting justice is less about speaking out yourself and more giving the platform for those affected to speak. Obviously, educating others and spreading awareness is important. But it is also crucial that we raise the voices of minorities. My job is to be an ally. To show up for those who need assistance. 

Toby:
understanding of justice: understand justice as a ideal of what is right and wrong 
Significance in society: justice is needed to maintain a balance and peace, or else anarchy and evil would rule, often misused and misdirected in attempts to justify deeds 
Important to respond to injustices: must always respond, do not let yourself be a bystander, not good mindset to think that another person will help, stand up for self and others, shaped me to be more wary of injustices, and try to stop and help those who I see are being treated unfairly 
I never experienced flat out racism, but I have seen it, heard of it, from stories or media 
Pull from my understanding from being taught, taught of racism, from media 
People's idea of justice is warped by what they see, based on experiences and the media they consume, everyone’s view is slightly different, people often act upon their ideals of justice, conflicting ideals of justice cause conflicts, now have a basis of obvious justice 


SCIENCE 
Biology 
Cell
3 REASONS WHY CELLS DIVIDE
Reproduce
Repair damage
Grow 

Reproduction 
Asexual Reproduction
Parent cell division results in 2 new organisms
Ideally has a complete set of genes
Only ONE parent
Produce symmetric or asymmetric

Sexual Reproduction
2 parents needed
Gametes - these cells contain only half of the DNA usually found in a body cell.
When 2 gametes combine, offspring inherits characteristics from both parents.
Repair
Body sheds lots of cells each day
New blood cell replaced every 120 days
Divide to heal injuries
New cells must replace a cell when it dies

Growth
Basic process of all life, reach a size limit
As surface area increases, so does the cells’ ability to transport materials through membrane
Larger the volume, greater the number of reactions that can occur in the cytoplasm
(In reference to the solute concentration)
Diffusion | High concentration → Low concentration (movement of either the solvent or solute) 
Osmosis  | less concentrated → more concentrated (movement of the solvent) 


CELL CYCLE
Three stages in cell cycle
Interphase
Mitosis 
Cytokinesis


Interphase: When the cell grows and does its job, replicates DNA, gets ready for mitosis 

Mitosis: the splitting of the nucleus into two daughter nucleuses 
PMAT 
Prophase: DNA bundled into chromosomes, they are visible, the nucleus disappears, centrosomes begin to move to opposite poles of the cell and spindle fibers form 
Metaphase: Chromosomes line up along the middle of the cell, spindle fibers attach to the centromeres, centrosomes reach opposite poles 
Anaphase: Chromatids are pulled apart from each other by the spindle fibers, they move towards the centrosomes, Chromatids become chromosomes 
Telophase: Nuclear membrane forms, and chromosomes unwind, spindle fibers disappear 

Cytokinesis: the splitting of the rest of the cell, organelles replicate, animal cells pinch the membrane and separate, plant cells form a cell plate in between that forms a cell wall that causes them to separate 

Cancer: Uncontrollable growth and spread of abnormal cells 
Tumour: 2 types; benign, unharmful, but can become harmful; malignant; harmful, cancerous, can spread
Cancer comes from the accumulation of genetic changes, mutations, minimum 6-9 genetic mutations 

General cell becomes specialised by turning on certain genetic code, when split the code that is on is pre-set, but if it is a stem cell, then that cell can change into anything, found in babies for growth, stem cells do not replicate, limited amount. 

Plant Cells 

Meristematic tissue: differentiates to 1. Epidermal tissue (covers outer surface) 2. vascular tissue (moves substance through plants) 3. Ground tissue (supporting tissue) 

Epidermal tissue: Like the skin of the plant. Provides protection for the plant. 

Vascular tissue: Vascular tissue is comprised of the xylem (water) and the phloem (sugar), it is the main transport system of plants

Ground tissue: Ground tissue is all the other tissue in a plant that is not epidermal or vascular tissue

Plant organ system: 2 main organ systems, shoot system (above ground) and root system (below ground). The shoot system mainly transports water and nutrients and performs photosynthesis and the root system is responsible for collecting water and delivering it up the xylem. 

Shoot System: Mainly above ground, contains leave stem and flower/fruit, transport substance through plant, make flower through sexual reproduction, structural support, photosynthesis 

Leaves: main site of photosynthesis, CO2 + H2O + light energy ▶️glucose + O2  chloroplast contains chlorophyll, absorbs sunlight, lower epidermis has stomata for gas exchange, takes in carbon dioxide and water vapour, expels oxygen and water vapour, guard cells protect, monitor what come in and out, open and closes the stomata, palisade layer is where most of the photosynthesis takes place, gas exchange takes place in the spongy mesophyll 

Chloroplast: contains thylakoids, thylakoids are made of stacked grana, capture sunlight 

Stem: support of shoot system, transports water and nutrients, food storage, protection, photosynthesis

Vascular bundles: Connects the root and shoot system, contains xylem and phloem 

Xylem and Phloem: Xylem transports water and minerals (one way) mature xylem is dead, phloem transports sugars (both ways) 

Water: essential, needed to take up nutrients from the soil, too much water in soil = bad, Cohesion, sticks together so it maintains water pressure to continue being pushed up, Adhesion, sticks to other things, allows the water to not fall back due to gravity  

Roots: take up water with nutrients from soil through osmosis, root hairs increase surface area to get more water, root hairs prevent attacks on the roots from insects, roots affect movement of water through plant, called Root Pressure, when roots bring in more minerals, more mineral content in the plant, that means higher concentration of water outside than inside, and so water diffuses in by diffusion, root pressure increases and pushes water up the xylem, but this is not enough to get all the way through the plant 

Transpiration: the pull from above to pull the water the rest of the way through the plant, water enters the leaves, it is used in photosynthesis and evaporated through stomata, lack of water, pulls water up 

Types of Animal Tissue
Epithelial 
Thin covering that protects organs
Lines body cavities, covers surface of body
Skin, inside of mouth, stomach

Connective tissue
Provides support and holds body parts together
Blood is considered a connective tissue
Inner layer of skin, tendon, ligament, bone

Muscle tissue
Contract to produce different types of movement
3 types of muscle tissue
Cardiac
Heart muscle that circulates blood
(involuntary)
Skeletal
Muscle around bones
Allows you to walk
(voluntary)
Smooth
Walls of digestive tract, uterus, bladder, blood vessels, other internal organs
(involuntary)

Nervous Tissue
Allow communication between body parts
cell/tissue generate brain electrical pulses
Controlled by brain
Transported through spinal cord 

Circulatory system:
Unoxygenated blood enters through the superior vena cava (upper heart from arms and the head) and the inferior vena cava (lower heart from trunk and legs)
Enters the right atrium and fills it where it is pumped through the Right AV valve
Enters the Right ventricle and is pumped through the right semilunar valve
Goes to the lungs where it is reoxygenated through diffusion
Enters the heart through the left and right pulmonary veins
Oxygenated blood fills the left atrium
It travels through the Left AV valve
Enters the left ventricle
Is pumped through the left semilunar valve
Leaves through the Aorta, upper and lower. Upper goes to arms and head and lower goes to trunk and arms.

NOTES: When blood is first pumped, it is high pressure and then slowly decreases in pressure
	Arteries/Aorta = away from the heart
Veins = into the heart
AV valve = ATRIUM TO VENTRICLE
Left side of the heart is more muscular than the right because it needs to be stronger to pump to the whole body rather than just the lungs.

Digestive system: 
1. Mouth chews up food and swallows it and it travels down the esophagus
2. From the esophagus, it enters the stomach. Sphincters allow food to enter and exit the stomach.
3. Small intestine: nutrients diffuse into the capillaries in the walls of the small intestine
4. Large intestine: gets rid of the water and prepares it for waste (the more water the Large intestine takes in
5. Rectum: poop is stored in the rectum
6. The poop leaves through the anus

KEY ORGANS:
PANCREAS: produces insulin that regulates sugar in your blood

KIDNEYS: filters blood. produces urine

LIVER: another filter… associated with filtering alcohol

GALLBLADDER: stores bile that breaks down fat

Respiratory system
Gas exchange is possible due to DIFFUSION
Needs permeable membrane or semi-permeable membrane to work
Tight capillary/alveoli network
Only 2 thin membranes to pass through
2 way movement
Surface area is critical

Capillary function
Bring oxygen into blood (red blood cells) - Via diffusion
Remove carbon dioxide from the blood - via diffusion



Chemistry
Particle Theory:
All Matter is made of tiny particles:
Particles of matter are in constant motion 
Particles of matter held together by strong electric forces
Empty space between particles that are big in comparison to the actual particles
Each substance has unique particles, different from particles of different substances
Temperature affects the speed of particles, higher = faster, farther apart, lower = slower, closer together 

Description of matter: 9
State of matter: solid, liquid, gas 
Colour: what colour 
Odour: spicey, flowery, etc. 
Clarity: clear, cloudy, opaque 
Lustre: shiny, dull 
Texture: smooth, coarse, etc 
Brittleness: break or shatter easily? 
Malleability: can be bent, folded, shaped? 
Dictillity: can be stretched into a wire? 

Chemical characteristics: 3
Reactivity: reactive (firework), unreactive (gold) 
Toxicity: poisonous (arsenic), or harmless (water) 
Flammability: flammable (gasoline), or not burn (salt) 

Physical Change: usually just a physical characteristic change only 
Chemical Change: change results in the formation of a new substance 
Indicator of chemical change: Produce gas, formation of a precipitate, change in colour or odour, change in energy system. 

Atom: basic unit of matter, made of protons, neutrons, and electrons 

Metals: all solid except mercury, usually shiny, malleable, good conductors of heat and electricity
Alkali Metals: low melt + boil point, soft, react with water, low density 
Non-metals: many gases, bad at conduct heat and electricity 
Metalloids: metal+nonmetal properties 
Halogens: row 17, very reactive 
Noble gases: all gases, extremely stable 

Atomic Notation: ex. 3517Cl : 35 = atomic mass (all protons, neutrons, electrons) 
17 = atomic number (protons and electrons) means the left over number after (-) is neutrons
(atomic number is number of protons, and also number of electrons, not combined) 
1.Each electron has a definite amount of energy 
2. A Further electron is from the nucleus = more energy 
3. Electrons can’t exist between levels, only jump between orbitals/shells 
4. Outer most shell = Valence electrons 

Bohr Diagrams: Danish, 1913, Niels Bohr, only for first 20 elements 
Steps, 1. Determine # of electrons 
2. Draw circle for nucleus, put element symbol inside 
3. Draw shells around, period of element = number of shells 
4. 1st shell only 2 electrons, don’t pair : 2nd shell 8 electrons max, draw in pairs, same with 3rd, 4rth, max 8 electrons, don’t pair
(there is a diagram called Louis, only draw valence)

Element: a substance that cannot be broken down by chemical means, atoms contain same atomic number: 

Compounds: pure substances made of 2 or more elements, chemically combined, connection known as bond, 2 types, Ionic and covalent  
The farther away the electron is from the nucleus, means more energy, which means the valence are involved in bonding
Atoms are stable when valence shells are full, want to lose or gain electrons to become stable
Ionic: Electrons are given or taken in order to make a stable compound (full valence shell) (become + or -) + = cation - = anion (always metal and non metal)

Molecular Compounds: Electrons are shared in order to make a stable compound. Think of a butt, it is connected to make a full valence shell.

Chemical equations

Ex. H2O + CO2 → H2CO3
Water + Carbon Dioxide → Carbonic Acid

Synthesis: The combination of smaller atoms or molecules into larger atoms or molecules

A + B → AB
Zinc + Sulfur → Zinc Sulfide
Z + S → ZS

Decomposition: The combination of smaller atoms or molecules into smaller atoms or molecules

AB → A+B
H2O → H2 + O2… need to balance
2H2O → 2H2 + O2

Balancing (conservation of mass): making sure there is the same amount of each molecule/element on each side of the equation

Balancing steps: 1. Balance metals 2. Non-metals/Polyatomics 3. Hydrogens 4. Oxygens (3 and 4 are interchangeable

Single Displacement: Based on the reactivity of elements table. Metal switches with metal and non metal switches with a non metal.

AB + C → CB



Double Displacement: Both the non metals or metals switch, regardless of its reactivity
AB + CD → AD + CB

Combustion: Fuel + Oxygen → Oxides + energy 

Complete combustion: Hydrocarbon + Oxygen → Carbon Dioxide + water + energy

Incomplete combustion: Hydrocarbon + Oxygen → Carbon Dioxide + Water + Energy + Carbon + Carbon Monoxide 

pH scale: scale from 0-14 that measures acidity and basicness. 7 is neutral (water). The closer to the extremes,0 or 14, the more acidic or basic it is. Acids can be used to neutralize bases and bases can be used to neutralize acids.

Acids and bases:

Naming Acids (Binary ex.HCl, Hydrochloric Acid) 
Binary Acids: composed of two elements, hydrogen and a non-metal.  A. Root of the Non-Metal Name (i.e. fluor for fluoride) 
B. Add the prefix Hydro - to the root name 
C. Add the ending - Ic Acid  to the root name 
Examples: 
HF (aq) =  Hydrofluoric Acid
 HI (aq) =  Hydroiodic Acid 
Naming Oxoacids  
Oxoacids are composed of hydrogen, oxygen and another element (commonly a polyatomic Ion)
 
               A. Name of the anion, without the Ate or Ite ending. 
B. If the anion name ended with Ate , replace it with Ic at the end of the name.  C. If the anion name ended in Ite , replace it with Ous. 
D. Add the word Acid
Examples:  
H2SO4 (aq) = Sulfuric Acid 
H2SO3 (aq) Sufurous Acid
HNO3 (aq) =  Nitric Acid
HNO2 (aq) = Nitrous Acid





Polyatomic Ions: Compounds that exist with a charge (ammonium is the only one with a positive charge)



Diatomic Ions
Atoms that cannot exist on their own. They need 2. HOFBrInCl the clown.


Physics 
Light: we can only see light that enters our eyes, we can only see light that is directed in a different direction if it reflects off of something, they path light takes is a ray, diagrams that show lights movement are called ray diagrams 
Light: Light is a type of energy our eyes are sensitive to (Operational definition, only tells us how we detect light, and not what light is) 
Light travels in straight lines, this is called rectilinear propagation 

Newton first noted that white light breaks into the colours of the rainbow when it passes through a prism, the colours are known as a Spectrum, when white light comes from the sun and gets broken down, its spectrum is red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and violet, to remember order ROY G BIV 

Those coloured lines could not be broken down further, they are pure colours identified by frequency and wavelength numbers 

 Conceptual Definition of Light: the atoms in sources that produce light are surrounded by electrons that can be excited to higher energy levels, when these electrons fall back to their original energy level, they give off energy in the form of light
Many ways for atoms to gain energy 
Eg, incandescent is the emission of light through heat, the 
Atoms gain energy by being heated 

Can’t hear some sounds in the same way we cant see some colours
For example, if an iron is on and hot, we cannot see it, but we can feel the heat, the “colour” is called infrared radiation, similarly, if we were to heat water in a microwave, we would not be able to see the colour of the heat that the water is absorbing, that is called microwave radiation

Visible light spectrum is the small part of a very large spectrum known as the electromagnetic system, 



Atoms in a Luminous Object emit light rays in every direction produced by other light source, and a Non-Luminous Object will scatter the light from the Luminous Object in every direction 

Rays of light travel from the object to the viewers eyes through a medium, a transparent medium allows almost all rays to pass through unaltered, air is a transparent medium, Opaque scatter the light, making the light rays unable to pass through (text book), Translucent will scatter most of the light, you can see the outline of the shape through it, but not the details (wax paper) 

Two eyes can determine the distance of an object better because it can triangulate on the position, this is called depth perception 

The apparent Size of the object depends on the angle of the light rays coming from the top and bottom of the object, the larger the angle the larger the object appears to be, can trick the eye easily 

Concave/convex mirrors: concave: parallel to F, to vertex bounces at same refracted angle, F to parallel, through C comes right back, want to know, size, inversion, location, type, the same with convex, but behind the mirror 

Biconvex (converging): Parallel through to F, Through F to Parallel, through vertex, straight through Biconcave (Diverging): Parallel goes to up, if back track it goes through the F on the objects side, through vertex goes straight through, going to F on the other side becomes parallel 

1/f = 1/di  + 1/do        hi / ho = -di  / do 
Refraction: the bending and changing of light when it passes through a medium, caused by the change in the light’s speed, can change when there is an increase or decrease in speed

Incident Ray: the light ray approaching 
Reflective Ray: the ray that bounces off a surface 
Incident Angle (i): The angle created between the incident ray and normal 
Reflective Angle (r): The angle created between the reflective ray and normal 
Refracted Ray: The ray that is bent upon entering another medium 
Refracted Angle (R): The angle between the refracted ray and normal 

Through a Slower Medium the ray will bend Towards the Normal
Through a Faster Medium the ray will bend Away from the Normal



Index of Refraction: is the Ratio of the speed of light through the vacuum of space and the speed of light through a specific medium 

Speed of Light: 3.00 x 108m/s 

(will be provided) n = c/v (n = index) (c = speed of light through a vacuum) (v = speed of light through a medium) 
Climate Change 
JUST LOOK AT YOUR CHEAT SHEET!!!!!
HISTORY
EXAM FORMAT (2.5 HOURS)
• SECTION A—MULTIPLE CHOICE (25 MARKS)
• SECTION B—TRUE or FALSE (15 MARKS)
• SECTION C—FILL IN THE BLANK (10 MARKS)
• SECTION D—ORDER OF EVENTS (10 MARKS)
• SECTION E—SHORT ANSWER (30 MARKS) SELECT TEN OF FIFTEEN OPTIONS
• SECTION F—DOC ANALYSIS (10 MARKS) SELECT TWO OF FIVE OPTIONS
TOTAL (100 MARKS)

STUDY GUIDE
• UNIT 1—WAR & ROAR (1900-1929)

o BOER WAR (1899-1902)
Importance: First recorded act of international military service
Summary: Greedy Brits fight South African Dutch settlers (Boers) for diamond and gold. Brits ask Canada for troops to help! English Canadians say yes my liege, French Canadians say NO! IT IS A BRITISH WAR!! Prime Minister Wilfred Laurier compromised, offered soldiers who volunteered and gave military equipment and transportation to South Africa. Brits will pay Canadian soldier’s wages and arrange for transport home.

Heroism:
5 Canadians earned the Victoria Cross
Private Richard Thompson received the Queen’s scarf from Queen Victoria

Death Toll:
7,000 Canadians would volunteer for service
280 lost their lives
More than 250 wounded

o WORLD WAR I (1914-1918)
Importance: people saw Canada as able to fight, led to WW2, Changed the way wars were fought
Instant cause: 
Franz Ferdinand, heir to Austrian-Hungarian throne was assassinated. 
Long term M.A.I.N causes: 
Militarism, everyone was building armies and that was a threat to each country
Alliances, one country fights? The others follow
Imperialism, taking over other countries and land
Nationalism, everyone thinks their country is better than others

Summary: The allies (The Triple Entente) Britain (Canada), France, and Russia fought the triple alliance, Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy. Ended with the Treaty of Versailles which put all the blame of the war on Germany. This led to Germany being poor and shameful.

61,000 Canadians died
650,000 Canadians and Newfoundlanders served in this war
More than 172,000 were wounded
24,142 conscripted

o SPANISH FLU (1918-1920)
Summary: Probably started in Fort Riley Kansas. Spread quickly because of the war that shipped sick soldiers back and forth from the USA to Europe and the rest of the world. First introduced to Canada through Quebec’s ports and spread from the westward as soldiers were being shipped. Symptoms were flu like and could develop into pneumonia and haemorrhaging.

500 million people worldwide died
50 thousand Canadians died

o ROARING TWENTIES (1920s)
The rise of:
Radio
Film
Jazz
Arts
Culture
New technologies
Urbanization
Roles and rights for women- Flapper: stylish, fashionable young women… They drank and smoked. National Council of Women of Canada was founded to help women, specifically in factories, immigrants, and prisoners.
Suffrage 1918
The right to run for parliament 1919
Agnes Macphail was the first woman in parliament in 1921
Labour unions
Winnipeg General Strike took 6 weeks
The OBU (One Big Union) formed in Calgary 1919
Economy
Consumerism
Rise of advertising
Buying on credit

• UNIT 2—THIS WORLD STRUGGLE (1929-1945)

o GREAT DEPRESSION (1930s)
Stock market crashed in October 1929. 
Black Thursday, Oct 24, 1929, Stock market took a major hit in NYC, Toronto, Montreal
Black Monday, Oct 28, 1929, Toronto Stock Exchange dropped by $1 million/minute at its peak
Black Tuesday, Oct 29, 1929, The stock market crashed
Unemployment… in come parts of the country it rose as high as 35% to 50%
Prairies were hit the hardest with dust storms, grasshoppers, and wheat price dropped 
RB Bennett became PM, he was a conservative, millionaire businessman. Against federal spending on relief programs. Placed high tariffs on Canadian exports and worsened the situation.
 relief camps were set up
Regina Riot: on July 1, 1935: Dominion Day, trekkers met in Market Square. The RCMP tried to arrest the leaders. One police officer died, Hundreds were injured. 130 trekkers were arrested. 8 were convicted. 

o WORLD WAR II (1939-1945)
Treaty of Versailles (1919) blamed Germany and Germans were angry. Hitler promised that he would restore Germany to what it was before. Germany remilitarized the Rhineland on March 7, 1936. On March 12, 1938, Germany joined Austria. Then in October 1938, they joined Sudetenland. On September 1, 1939, Germany invaded Poland. 1939: Sept 3 Britain and France declare war… Sept 10 Canada declare war

o HOLOCAUST (1933-1945)
Germany blamed the loss of the first world war on the presence of Jews in their countries. They believed the Jews and communists sabotaged Germany during the war. Hitler further spread this idea further and began the Holocaust. 1933, they held mass book burnings of Jewish and Communist literature. Kristallnacht: November 9-10, 1938, Jewish businesses were destroyed and synagogues were burned. Over twenty thousand Jewish men were taken to concentration camps. Jews were encouraged to leave Germany. Later on, they were forced to wear badges of identification, their homes were taken, forced into ghettos, and then into concentration camps. From 1941 to 1945, Nazis rounded up Jews and sent them to concentration camps. They decided they would murder them all using gas chambers and burn their bodies. 12 million people died in the Holocaust, 6 million of them were Jews.

• UNIT 3—THE GOLDEN AGE (1945-1957)

o COLD WAR (1945-1991)
Cold war: a war without actual fighting (BOMBASTIC SIDE EYE)

The USSR and the USA are going through a cold war, Canada being affected because they are between the two. Igor Gouzenko was a clerk in the Russian embassy that grew to like Canada. He went to the government to tell them that there were Russian spies in the country but no one believed him until he was almost kidnapped. 

At this time, Germany was divided by two. East Germany was controlled by Russia while West Germany was controlled by France, USA, and Britain. Berlin, which was in East Germany, was also split in two. West Berlin was controlled by France, USA, and Britain while East Berlin was controlled by Russia.

o KOREAN WAR (1950-1953)
Significance: A war by proxy between the USSR and USA

South and North Korea were divided in two. North Korea attacked South Korea first. North Korea was supported by the USSR and South Korea was supported by the USA.

o SUEZ CRISIS (1956)
The Suez canal was a canal in Egypt that was built by Britain. It was very important in terms of trading, exporting, and importing. It connected Asia and Europe, making it possible for boats to pass through the canal instead of going around Africa. Egypt wanted control over the canal since it was in their land. Egypt nationalized the canal and the Israelis attacked Egypt. Then, the British and the French attacked two days later. Lester B. Pearson was partially responsible for preventing the next world war. He suggested using the United Nations to create a large scale peacemaking force that could be sent to Egypt.

• UNIT 4—PEACE & PATRIATION (1957-1982)

o GREAT FLAG DEBATE (1963-1968)
The old flag was the Red Ensign, which had a lot of British influence. Lester B Pearson was determined to resolve the Great Flag Debate and suggested the “Pearson Pennant” which had 3 maple leaves on a white square, bordered by 2 blue bands. George Stanley was a former lieutenant-colonel in the Canadian Army and a military historian. He proposed a flag in 1964 and it was chosen. 

o THE WHITE PAPER (1969)
PM Pierre Trudeau and Minister of Indian Affairs Jean Chretien produced a white paper (Government document that proposes a solution to a problem.) They suggested dissolving the Department of Indian Affairs as well as the Indian Act and transferring responsibility of First Nations relations from the federal government to the provinces. This is a problem because although the Indian Act was racist, it tied Indigenous people to their land and the treaties. It promised that they would be citizens PLUS. When drafting the white paper, the Indigenous peoples were not consulted. Harold Cardinal responded to this by writing the Unjust Society (1969) and Citizens Plus (1970) also called the Red Paper. 


o OCTOBER CRISIS (1970)
The quiet revolution was happening in Quebec. French Canadians were Nationalistic and wanted to leave Canada. The Front de Libération du Québec (FLQ) were a Nationalistic terrorist group that believed in French Canadian sovereignty. They wanted complete independence for Quebec and to create a French-Speaking worker’s society. They resorted to violence; bombings, robberies and kidnappings. On October 5, 1970, they kidnapped James Cross, the British trade commissioner in Montreal. They demanded arrested FLQ members be released, $500,000, publishing  the FLQ manifesto and receiving an airplane to fly FLQ members to Cuba or Algeria. Pierre Laporte was kidnapped on Oct 10. He was murdered the day after Pierre Trudeau declared the war measures act which made Quebecers Enemy aliens. The first time the War measures act was invoked outside of the war. When reporters asked how far Trudeau would go to stop the FLQ, he said just watch me.

o PATRIATION OF THE CONSTITUTION (1982)
This was the bringing home of Canada’s constitution in April of 1982 from London, England where it had been since 1867. In the patriation ceremony, Queen Elizabeth II attended. Trudeau wanted to patriate the constitution because he wanted more control over Canada. More autonomy. The kitchen accord was a meeting with Jean Chretien and the attorney general of Saskatchewan in an unused kitchen. The Gang of Eight was unhappy with Trudeau’s Charter of Rights and Freedoms. It helped bridge Ottawa and the Gang of Eight (Quebec, Alberta, Manitoba, PEI, Newfoundland, BC, Saskatchewan, Nova Scotia). They compromised by adding a clause that let governments excuse their laws with certain Charter rights. 

• UNIT 5—WE THE NORTH (1982-PRESENT)

o Meech Lake (1987) and the Charlottetown (1992) Accords 
The two attempts from Canada to get Quebec to sign the Constitution. By the prime minister of that time, Brian Mulroney. To pass either and give Quebec special privileges, all of the provinces had to be in agreement. The first time with the Meech Lake accord, they promised to strengthen provincial powers, and designate Quebec as a “distinct society”. It did not go through because the premier of Manitoba, Elijah Harper, was against it, and denied it, it did not take into account the aboriginal leaders opinions. Later, the government tried again with the Charlottetown accord, this time they included the aboriginal leaders, they promised Quebec the principle of self government, and entrenched existing treaty rights in the Constitution. This time, ironically, Quebec was against it. That is because some of the population thought that it would jeopardize their individual or collective rights. 

o Armenian Genocide (1916-1917) 
There is an area of land in Turkey, where it used to be Armenian land, and many Armenians live there. The Turkey people did not like that and committed a genocide, killing 1.8m people. In relation to Canada, April 8 1982, a Turkish diplomat was shot by Armenian parliamentary group, the ASALA. August 27, 1982, another Turkish diplomat was shot, this time killed, by an Armenian parliamentary group called the JCAG. MMarch 12, 1985, three members of the Armenian Revolutionary Army (ARA) stormed the Turkish embassy, killing the on-duty security officer, and taking 12 people hostage; they were apprehended later. 

o Emergencies Act (1988) 
It was made to replace the War Measures act. It allows the government to get special privileges and powers based on the situation it was used in, and based on the situation, the government can do different things. There are more constrictions as to limit use and misuse of the Emergencies Act. It was also made to be less prejudiced and racist and as extreme in some cases as the Emergencies Act. 

o Canadian Parties 
Canada runs on a two party plus system, where two parties are in control of the government and most of the seats. Ours is kinda like a multi-party system, anyone and any amount can run, but the political scene has been mostly dominated by two parties. Some smaller parties that do get seats. Dominated by the Liberals and the Conservatives. Liberals on the left, and Conservatives on the right. 
o Canada on the rise: Canada more active globally, and make a bigger impact in the world
o LOTS OF THINGS!
o AND OTHER THINGS, TOO!