Unit 1: The Nature of Religion, Truth, and God

Lessons 2-4: RELIGION

Definition of Religion (from Corduan, Neighboring Faiths): A religion is a system of beliefs and practices that by means of its cultus directs a person toward transcendence and, thus, provides meaning and coherence to a person’s life

Lesson 3: Origin of Religion

The Three Theories of Religion:

Subjective Approach: Religion started from us
By showing how it fulfills a specific psychological need, religion is not true
We created religion as an outcome of our psychological needs 
There is no divine being 
Universal feeling of absolute dependence, expressed in depending on an absolute, God 
Concept of God is a combination of idealized human traits
Idealized father image referred to as God 
Encounter with consciousness of holiness, results in fear and awe
Subconscious symbolism is expressed through a hierophany as religion 
Symbolic archetypes in human dreams take on new meanings, becoming religion

Problems with this view: Infinite regress (why do we have these needs and where do they come from? How do we have a notion of things we’ve never seen/experienced, how can we imagine these things?) No historical evidence/research, just psychological 

Evolutionary Approach: Religion is an aspect of human culture
Must be understandable without reference to actual supernatural powers
Began on a very primitive/childlike level, began to evolve in complexity 
Religion of least developed cultures must be closest to the religion of early humans
Religion evolves from lower to higher forms as cultures develop
The 5 Stages:
Mana/Fetishism
Spiritual force/not personal
Fetish: special object with great amount of mana inside
Magic: manipulation of spiritual forces to bring a desired result, technique matters
Animism
Latin anima=soul
Nature spirits and ancestor spirits
Spirits are finite, limited, and personal
Polytheism
Finite spirits -> superior gods
Eg. spirit of distinguished ancestor exalted -> divine status
Eg. object inhabited by powerful spirit-> divine status
Eg. abstract principles -> exalted and personified
Magic replaced with worship
Henotheism
People recognize different gods but worship only one
Monotheism
Highest level: finally reaches the idea that only one God exists
Atheism: 6th stage (beyond God) -> i.e. no God

- Problems with this view: 
Stages of development never observed in this order
No record of any culture going from mana to monotheism
Changes occur, but can happen in both directions
Labels are used independently (outside of the theory) to classify different types of religions but not tied to the idea that they are linked in a developmental sequence

Original Monotheism - religion exists because God exists
Religion originated from God, revealed by God
The reality of God precedes human awareness of God
People responded to God’s revelation of himself, that’s how religion began 
Wilhelm Schmidt research:
Almost all religions and culture believe
In a God in the sky
Referred to as masculine
Creates world
Provides standard of behavior
Almost no magic
Contrary to what the evolutionary approach predicts
Memory of a time where monotheistic God was worshiped but eventually did not receive obedience
God provides a way to reconcile to him
3 Inferences
Decisive change away from monotheism
No clear pattern of departure or sequence to different types of religion
Once monotheism is abandoned, the religion continues to change type
Problems: Culture-history approach leaves room for a degree of uncertainty
Lesson 5: Ritual and Priesthood
Read your assignment
Folk Religion vs expert religion

Lesson 6: Worldview 

What we see: Behavior - what is done?
Undergirded by: Values - what is good?
Undergirded by: Beliefs - what is true?
Undergirded by: Worldview - what is real? 
Ultimately undergirded by: the root question - Does God exist? If so, what is God like? 
One’s overall worldview provides a system of beliefs which are reflected in values and behavior 
Root question (roots) supports worldview (trunk), which produces religion (branches) 

4 basic questions (OMMD) every worldview must answer:
The question of origin - where do we come from?
The question of meaning - why are we here?
The question of morality - what’s right and wrong?
The question of destiny - where are we going?

Lesson 7: TRUTH

Definition of Truth: that which corresponds to reality
Subjective Truth: Matters of preference, centered on the individual
Objective Truth: Matters of fact, applied to all individuals 

4 truths about truth (objective, absolute truth) 
All truth claims are absolute, narrow, and exclusive. 
Truth is discovered, not invented. 
Beliefs cannot change a fact, no matter how sincerely they are held. 
Truth is trans-cultural. 
Something can be true even if no one knows it, admits it, or agrees on it. 

3 Laws of Logic
Law of Identity (A=A) - a thing is what it is 
Law of Noncontradiction (T≠F, T≠~T) - a proposition cannot be both T and F at the same time and in the same respect 
Law of the Excluded Middle (T or F) - a proposition is either T or F, no middle ground 

Major perspectives on religion with respect to Subjective and Objective Truth:
Naturalism: all religions are mistaken
Exclusivism: only one religion is correct and all others are mistaken
Inclusivism: only one religion is fully correct but others have some truth
Subjectivism: each religion is correct in the sense that it’s good for its adherents.
Pluralism: all religions are correct but each has a partial perspective and offers a different path of salvation.
Relativism: the correctness of a religion is a relative to the worldview of its adherents. “my beliefs are valid for me: those of others are valid for them”

Truth Claims and Religions:
Denial of objective truth is a claim of objective truth
Statement: “Religious truth is subjective” claims to be objective truth about religion
Statement: “Religious truth is not objective” claims to objective truth about religion
Objective truth can be denied without being affirmed

All religions can’t be true because they teach opposites. Opposites can’t both be true
One religion can be true, but we may need someone to help us see the Truth
All religions can have some truth, but if key contradictions exist and one religion is true, then other religions are false overall

All Truth is God’s Truth and religions that reject truth of Christ and His Gospel can still have some truth like human truth
Contrary beliefs are possible, but contrary truths are not possible
You can believe everything is true, but everything can’t be true

Lesson 8: vs Pluralism and Relativism

Major perspectives on religion:
Atheism- God or gods do not exist
Theism- God or gods exist
Monotheism- God exists; there is only one God, and God is Personal
Polytheism- There are many gods
Pantheism- Everything is God
Panentheism - Everything is in God
Agnosticism - God’s existence is unknowable for certain
Nontheism- God’s existence is irrelevant

Read the Blind Men and Elephant parable

Key Points on Objective truth:
Matters of fact 
Applied to all individuals

Pluralism vs Relativism
Religious Pluralism is that all religions are correct and each have a partial perspective and offers a different path of salvation
Religious relativism is the correctness of a religion relative to the worldview of its adherents.

Lesson 9: GOD- arguments against (Atheism and Evil)

Did God create evil?
P1 God created all things
P2 Evil is something
C Therefore, God created evil

Mini response by Christians
First premise is true but the second premise needs to be reexamined
Evil is not something, it is a lack in things 
When good that should be there is missing, that is evil

Theodicy
P1 If God is all good, he would destroy evil and suffering
P2 If God is all powerful, he could destroy evil and suffering
P3 Evil is not destroyed
C Therefore, there is no God.

Christian response
Evil cannot be destroyed without destroying freedom
We are made in the image of God
God is free and autonomous, we are free but not autonomous
God created the fact of freedom, we performed the acts of freedom 
God made evil possible, we made evil actual

Christian syllogism 
P1 If God is all good, he will defeat evil and end suffering
P2 If God is all powerful, he can defeat evil and suffering
P3 Evil is not defeated yet
C Therefore, God can and will defeat evil

Arguments for the Existence of God (OCTME+P)
Ontological- deals w/ nature of being and existence
Cosmological- origins of the universe
Teleological- focuses on purpose (the design argument)
Moral- where do our morals come from?
Experience- do people experience things beyond us?
Pascal’s Wager



Ontological
St. Anselm’s Ontological Argument
By definition, God is a being than which none greater can be imagined (maximal being) 
A being that necessarily exists in reality is greater than a being that does not necessarily exist (philosophical necessity) 
If God exists as an idea in the mind but does not necessarily exist, then we can imagine something greater than God
But we cannot imagine something greater than God 
Thus if God exists in the mind as an idea, then God necessarily exists in reality
God exists in the mind as an idea
Therefore, God exists in reality

Cosmological
If the universe never had a beginning, then the events that happened are infinite, but this doesn’t make sense as infinite is nowhere to be found in material reality
Since past events are not just ideas but are real, then the number must be finite
The universe had to have a beginning
Many atheists believe in the Big Bang, where the universe formed from nothing
But something cannot come from nothing, there must have been a cause

Syllogism
P1 Whatever begins to exist has a cause
P2 The universe began to exist
C Therefore, the universe has a cause

This cause must be an uncaused, changeless, timeless, and immaterial being which created the universe
It must also transcend space and also be personal 
Only way for the cause to be timeless and the effect to begin in time is for the cause to be a personal agent who freely chooses to create this effect

Teleological
Scientists have discovered that the existence of intelligent life depends upon a complex and delicate balance of initial conditions given in the Big Bang
Our existence is balanced on a knife’s edge
When laws of nature are mathematical equations, there are certain constants
The arbitrary quantities fall into an extraordinarily narrow range of life permitting values
A small change can prevent a life-permitting universe
The Big Bang’s condition existing by chance are out of 10^10(123)
Ratios must also be finely tuned
Three possibilities for the remarkable fine-tuning of the universe: physical necessity, chance, or design
There are two alternatives:
Theory of Everything, it had to be that way, very implausible, no physical reason why constants and quantities are the way they are
Fine tuning is just by chance, the problem is that the odds against the universe being life permitting is so great that they cannot be faced. There is an inconceivably small chance that everything in the universe is fine tuned to the way they are just by random luck. 
Seeing these arguments, it is reasonable to conclude that the universe is not due to physical necessity or chance, but design

Syllogism
P1 The fine-tuning of the universe is due to either physical necessity, chance, or design
P2 It is not due to physical necessity or chance
C Therefore, it is due to design

Moral Argument (W.L. Craig)
If God does not exist, objective morals do not exist
To say there are objective morals is to say that something is right or wrong independently of whether anybody believes it to be so
According to J.L. Mackie, if there are objective moral values, they make the existence of God more probable
Without God, there is no absolute right or wrong
But objective values do exist, and deep down we all know it
Actions like rape, torture, and child abuse aren’t just socially unacceptable, they’re moral abominations

Syllogism
P1 If God does not exist, objective moral values do not exist
P2 Objective moral values do exist
C Therefore, God exists

Moral Argument (C.S. Lewis)
There is a universal moral law, and we appeal to a universal moral standard all the time
We do not have to explain why these things are considered morally bad or evil, they are and everyone knows it
You would assume it is an understood standard for all people
Without a universal moral law, on what grounds can we judge Nazis for what they do?
Lewis believes that the moral law is something that all humans are bound to follow, no matter how hard they try to escape from it
If there is a Universal Moral Law, then there is a Universal Moral Law Giver
Without a person who makes these laws, it seems inexplicable that they should exist
This Law giver cannot be any being, they have to be supremely powerful, perfectly good, and interested in our behavior. Therefore, God exists and gives us this law
Moral Law is not just Herd Instinct, meaning following our strongest impulse. But our strongest impulse is not always the right thing to do
Moral Law is not just a social convention because we can accept groups of people as the source of morality but not individuals. We can say that morality is determined by societies or other social conventions, but how can we ever say a society has morally improved if the moral standard is set by that society?
Moral Law is not just our own will, because it’s pointless to have morality on one’s own terms, as why bother with it at all if we can change our morals to our convenience?
There can not be no moral law because moral law is not just a description of human behavior, but a prescription for human behavior. We cannot escape moral law. We did not create it, it is impressed upon us. 

Syllogism
P1 There is a universal moral law.
P2 If there is a universal moral law, there must be a universal moral lawgiver.
C Therefore, There must be God.

Experience Argument 
God exists wholly apart from arguments simply by experiencing him
God is not an inferred entity, but an experienced reality, not just an idea adopted by the mind
These are called properly basic beliefs, beliefs based not on other beliefs, but are part of the foundation of the person’s system of beliefs
No properly basic beliefs can be proved.
Properly basic beliefs are not arbitrary, but are grounded in experience
Belief in God for those who seek him is a properly basic belief

Syllogism
P1 Beliefs which are appropriately grounded may be rationally accepted as basic beliefs not grounded on argument
P2 Belief that the biblical God exists is appropriately grounded
C Therefore, belief that the biblical God exists may be rationally accepted as a properly basic belief not grounded on argument

Pascal’s Wager
Objective: God exists or he doesn’t exist
Subjective: I believe or I don’t believe
If God exists, and I believe in him, I gain everything and lose nothing
If God exists, and I don’t believe in him, I gain nothing and lose everything
If God doesn’t exist, whether I believe or not, I gain nothing and lose nothing



Table Form




