Psychology: the scientific study of the mind, how it works, and how it affects behavior

Introduction

Psyche: the essence of the person and decides how a person behaves, by PLATO

Empirical approach (Aristotle): the idea that to study the mind, we must use observations and reasoning to gather more information about the mind

Cartesian Dualism: the belief that the mind and body are NOT connected, body is material, mind is immaterial

School of thought: systematic and structural ways of approaching questions related to human behavior that have different sets of underlying assumptions (e.g. Psychodynamic theory, Behavioral, Humanistic, Cognitive)

Psychodynamics

Psychodynamic theory: an approach to therapy that focuses on resolving a patient's conflicted conscious  and unconscious feelings. Derived from Freud’s psychoanalytic theory  where all human behavior is influenced by early childhood and that childhood experiences influence the unconscious mind throughout life.
Conscious: information that we are always aware of
Unconscious: Information processing in our mind that we are not aware of
Id: The instinctual part of the mind, which operated on the pleasure principle
Ego: The rational part of the mind, which operates on the reality principle
Superego: Moral center of the mind
Ego works to satisfy the needs of the is while satisfying the moral superego.
Freud described the mind as an iceberg with the conscious mind above the water and the unconscious mind below the surface.
Freud believed that uncovering the unconscious mind would allow for a better understanding of human behavior and relationships.
Psychoanalysis therapy: designed to “release repressed emotions and experiences (i.e. make the unconscious  conscious) and…treat depression and anxiety disorders” 
Examine dreams and fantasies
Free association: a method used in which a patient relaxes and is told to say whatever comes to mind.
Freud believed that inner conflict within the psyche is inevitable. He argues that the ego can use various defense mechanisms to prevent it from becoming overwhelmed by anxiety caused by this inner conflict.
Defense mechanism: the egos way of distorting reality to deal with anxiety
These include denial, repression, compensation, acting out, projection etc.
Freud believed that personality results from the ego’s efforts to resolve these conflicts.
Early psychodynamic theorists believed that early childhood experiences are important in understanding personality, motivation and behavior. Freud argues that human development occurs mainly in the first few years as people struggle to resolve sexually based conflicts. Today’s developmental psychologists believe that development is lifelong, not just in childhood.


Behaviorism

Behavioral Psychology: an approach that suggests that behavior is shaped by the environment, that psychologists need empirical evidence obtained through experimentation to understand and change human behavior, and emphasizes observable behavior and phenomenon

Classical conditioning- a type of learning where a once neutral stimulus comes to produce a particular response after pairings with a conditioned stimulus (Dog Experiment)

Operant Conditioning- a type of experiment involving rewards and punishment to influence behavior (Skinner Box)

Positive Reinforcement- favorable events or outcomes that are presented after the behavior. In situations that reflect positive reinforcement, a response or behavior is strengthened by the addition of something, such as praise or a direct reward

Negative reinforcement- removal of unfavorable events or outcomes after a display of behavior. In these situations, a response is strengthened by the removal of something considered unpleasant

Punishment- involves applying a negative consequence or unfavorable event in order to decrease the frequency of a certain behavior

Humanism

Humanistic Psychology: an approach that emphasizes looking at the whole individual and stresses concepts such as free will, self-efficacy, and self-actualization. It believes that a client should be very involved in his or her own recovery, rather than relying only on the therapist's interpretation of the issues. It strives to help people fulfill their potential and maximize their well-being. Qualitative research is emphasized.

Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs: Maslow's hierarchy of needs explains that basic needs need to be met before higher order needs become important.

Self actualization- reaching one’s full potential; occurs only after basic physical and psychological needs are met.

Basic needs: Psychological needs and Safety needs
Growth Needs: Love and belonging needs, esteem, and self actualization

Physiological Needs- needs required to sustain life. Believed by Maslow to have the greatest strength until they are satisfied.

Safety needs- need for self-preservation both in the present and the future. Includes the needs to be physically safe, to have all physiological needs met, to have safe circumstances, stability and projection.

Belongingness and love needs- need for relationships connections. Maslow warned that if these needs are not met then the person may suffer from more serious mental illnesses. 

Esteem Needs- need for self-confidence/self-respect and the respect of others. This need is higher on the hierarchy because one you have self-respect, it is harder to lose it.

Self actualization- The need to maximize one’s potential, whatever it may be. As Maslow expressed it, “ What a man can be, he must be.” Thus, self-actualization is the desire to become what one is capable of becoming. The way self-actualization is expressed can change over the life cycle.
In addition, Maslow believed this hierarchy did not necessarily apply universally but felt it was a typical pattern that operates most of the time. He also realized that there were numerous exceptions to this general tendency.

Logotherapy: from the greek word logos, which man mean study, word, spirit, God, or meaning. Frankl believed that everyone has an inborn inclination to seek the meaning of his or her existence and that this determination exists even in the worst circumstances. Logotherapy suggests that humans are motivated by a need for meaning. Frankl also believed that those people who cannot find meaning in their lives will feel empty which can lead to depression. Frankl believed that we have the freedom to choose how we respond to situations and thus the power to shape our own life. 

Client centered therapy- a humanist therapy in which the client plays an active role. This approach focuses on the potential of each person to realize his or her own growth in self-awareness and self-fulfillment. Focused on the present and the future as opposed to other approaches which focus on the past. Gives more value to the conscious, rather than the unconscious.

Built on several ideas:
Non-directive: client is encouraged to control the direction and tone of the therapy session in order for the therapist to avoid influencing their thoughts/ideas. 
Unconditional positive regard: therapist shows complete acceptance and support for their client in order not to facilitate the healing process. All forms of emotional expression are encouraged.
Empathetic understanding: therapists must act as an emotional ‘mirror’ for their client in  order that they may become more self aware of their thoughts, emotions and feelings. It’s believed that the client will feel safe from judgment and more able to self direct the healing process.

Applications of Humanistic Psychology: Has had a major influence on education, and has led to something called ‘open’ or ‘students’ education. Students are encouraged to take responsibility for their own learning by being creative, curious, cooperative and inquisitive. Students are encouraged to learn in the way that is best for them and the teacher facilitated that learning process.

Criticisms 
Too subjective: the value placed on individual experience makes it difficult to objectively study and measure. 

Unquantifiable: based heavily on data that is largely unobservable and unmeasurable. Difficult to draw conclusions based on this information.


Psychological Approaches to Understanding Human Behavior

Clinical Psychology: Concerned with assessment and treatment of Mental Illness, Abnormal Behavior, and Psychiatric Problems

Psychoanalytic Approach: Psychologists who utilize this perspective may use techniques such as tree association to investigate a client’s underlying, unconscious motivation

Humanistic Perspective: Looks at the client more holistically and is focused on such things as self-actualization and helping people realize their full potential and helping people realize their full potential

Developmental Psychology: Interested in how and why human beings develop over the course of their life, focuses on the stages of human development, and determining average psychological progression at each stage of life, and can give an idea of what to expect later in life and how to deal with psychological issues

Experimental Psychology: Area of psychology that uses scientific method to research mind and behavior
The basics of conducting a psychology experiment involve:
Randomly assigning participants to groups
Defining Variables
Developing hypothesis
Manipulating independent variables and Measuring dependent variables

Double Blind Experiment: Standard in psychological research, neither the experiments nor participants know who is receiving particular treatment, created to reduce bias due to demand characteristics

Demand Characteristics: A subtle hint or clue that the experimenter gives that makes participants aware of what the experimenter expects to find or how participants are expected to behave, this can change the outcome of an experiment because participants will change their behavior based on what the experimenter is looking for

Example: The Placebo Effect


Cognitive Psychology

Cognitive Psychology: an approach dedicated to the study and application of how the brain learns

Cognition: the mental processes in the brain associated with thinking, knowing, and remembering

Social Cognitive Theory: theory emphasizing that learning occurs within a social context (Albert Bandura)

Bobo Doll Experiment: The children watch a video of an adult beating a bobo doll, finding out children who observe violence are more attracted and prone to violence

Lost in the Mall Experiment: A fake journal gives the idea that they were lost in the mall, created a fake memory


Developmental Psychology

Developmental Psychology: the study of how humans grow, change, and adapt across the course of their lives

Piaget’s Stages of cognitive development:  Piaget believed that children were not less intelligent, but thought differently. Each stage is marked by shifts in how children see and understand the world

Sensorimotor Stage: 0-2 years
Pre-Operational Stage: 2-6 years
Concrete operational stage: 7-11 years
Formal Operational: 12-adulthood

Erikson’s Stages of psychological development: 

Eight stages from childhood to adulthood in which identity emerges and matures
By resolving each dilemma, the individual acquires the basic strength needed to meet the challenges of the next stage

Theories of Attachment

Attachment: an enduring emotional bond between an infant and its caregiver

Erikson’s 8 Stages of Psychosocial Development Trust vs. Mistrust: 

Infants whose needs are not met develop mistrust and see the world negatively, the quality of the bond between caregiver and child is the foundation for personality growth and determines how well the child adjusts later in life

Learning/Behaviourist Theory of Attachment

Attachment is a set of learned attachments. The basis for the learning of attachments is the provision of food. An infant will initially form an attachment to whoever feeds it
The infant learns to associate the feeder with the comfort of being fed and through the process of classical conditioning, finds contact comforting

Evolutionary Theory of Attachment

Children come into the world biologically pre-programmed to form attachments with others, because this helps them survive
The infant will produce behaviors such as crying to get attention from adults
The determinant of attachment is not food, but care and responsiveness
There is a critical period for development of attachment (0-5 years). If this is not done properly, the child will suffer from irreversible developmental consequences (-intelligence and +aggression)

Surrogate Mother Experiment
Strange Situation Experiment

Heredity and environment and personality

Heredity: physical characteristics and aspects of personality and behaviour that are passed down genetically from your relatives. Human genome project identifies all 3 billion DNA subunits and found that humans share 99.9% of the same nucleotide bases. Psychologists don’t believe that our personalities and behavior are 100 % dependent on our genes. A lot of factors in our environment can influence your development. 

Twin Studies
Only differences between twins are due to environmental factors. Identical or Fraternal Twins. 
Used by psychologists to tell what is inherited and what is environemtal

Twins raised apart
Thomas J Bouchard studied twins raised apart to try and determine just how much twins' similarities are based on genetics. Jim Twins were first in study.
