1.1 Sustainability
Ecosystem - all of the interacting parts of a biological community and its environment
Terrestrial Ecosystem - an ecosystem that is land-based
Aquatic Ecosystem - an ecosystem that is water-based, either freshwater or saltwater

Sustainable ecosystem - an ecosystem that is capable of withstanding pressure and giving support to variety of organisms
The “Lorax”, and Easter Island were not sustainable ecosystems

Parts of an Ecosystem
Biotic - the living parts of an ecosystem, for e.g. plants, animals, and micro-organisms
Characteristics of an ecosystem
Symbiosis - the interaction between members of two different species that live together in a close association
E.g. Tree and mushroom
Predation - when one organism consumes another organism
E.g. Lion and Gazelle
Competition - when two or more organisms compete for the same resource, such as food, in the same location at the same time
E.g. dandelions and grass
Abiotic - the non-living parts of an ecosystem
For example, the biotic world needs the following characteristics to survive…


Read page 12 and fill in the abiotic chart


Cycling of Matter and Earth’s Spheres
Lithosphere - the hard part of Earth’s surface
Hydrosphere - all the water found on Earth, including lakes, oceans, and groundwater
Atmosphere - the layers of gases above the Earth’s surface
Biosphere - the regions of Earth where living organisms exist (found only on the Earth)

The four nutrient Cycles
Nutrients - a chemical that is essential to living things and is cycled through ecosystems
The water cycle
The carbon cycle
The nitrogen cycle
The phosphorus cycle



Human Activities and Nutrient Cycles
Eutrophication- a process in which nutrient levels in aquatic ecosystems increases leading to an increase in the populations of primary producers
Fertilizer runs off from farmland to water
Algae bloom
Submerged plants die due to reduced light
Algae and other plants die
Bacteria uses oxygen during decomposition
Oxygen levels drop and fish start to die

Social Policy on these Human Activities
In 1972, Canada and the USA signed the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement where they would “restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the waters of the Great Lakes Basin Ecosystem.”
Environmental Farm Plans have been examined and developed to reduce the impact of phosphorus coming to their farms.
Municipal, provincial, and national courts have been passing by-laws to reduce pesticides since 1991.

The Water Cycle

The Nitrogen cycle 


The Phosphorus Cycle


1.2 The Biosphere and Energy
All activities require a source of energy(fuel), which can be solar energy, sugar, gasoline, etc.

Photosynthesis and the Sun’s energy
Since the sun is able to supply energy to the Earth for a very long time, this conversion of solar energy to chemical energy in photosynthesis is very important to the biosphere and all life. Primary producers are able to harvest this solar energy using photosynthesis. Chlorophyll is a green pigment on leaves and is useful in the photosynthesis process.



What are the main benefits of photosynthesis? 
Produces Glucose
Adds oxygen to the atmosphere 
Remove CO2 from the atmosphere

Trophic Levels
Trophic level - a category of organisms that is defined by how the organisms gain their energy

Biomass
Biomass- the total mass of living organisms in a defined group or area

Trophic Efficiency - a measure of the amount of energy or biomass transferred from one trophic level lto the next higher trophic level

The higher the trophic level, the less efficient the organisms in the trophic level are in retaining this converted solar energy (biomass). Why?
Herbivores and omnivores may not eat all the parts of the plant
Carnivores and omnivores do not digest all parts of an animal
At every level, energy is lost as heat from the bodies of organisms

Water Pollution and Bioaccumulation
Bioaccumulation - a process in which materials, especially toxins, are ingested by an organism at a rate greater than they are eliminated

Biomagnification - a process where the concentration of a toxin increases as it moves up one trophic level to the next





1.3 Extracting Energy from Biomass
Cellular Respiration - a process that releases energy from organic molecules, especially carbohydrates, in the presence of oxygen
Used by plants, animals, fungi, and other organisms

Fermentation - a process that releases energy from organic molecules, especially carbohydrates, in the absence of oxygen

Cellular Respiration:
C6H12O6 + 6O2  ->  6CO2 + 6H2O + energy released
Glucose + oxygen -> carbon dioxide + water + energy released

Extracting energy from Food
Even though plants produce their own food (glucose) they will need to use cellular respiration to break glucose down to get energy from it.


Carbon Dioxide and Other Greenhouse Gases
Greenhouse Gases - atmospheric gases that prevent heat from leaving the atmosphere, thus increasing the temperature of the atmosphere (e.g. water vapour, methane, and carbon dioxide)

Greenhouse effect - the natural warming of Earth as a result of greenhouse gases, which traps some of the energy that would otherwise leave Earth (without this the Earth’s temperature would average 0°c instead of 14°c)

Biomass and Fossil Fuels
Over time, biomass that was not cycled through the biosphere, but settled into places on Earth that had little oxygen was changed into fossil fuels with a lot of pressure and heat. These fossil fuels would include coal, petroleum, and natural gas. When we now burn fossil fuels, oxygen is required for the reaction, and carbon dioxide is produced. This is similar to cellular respiration.

Since the industrial revolution, our human activities have increased the amount of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, that it is the cause of global warming.




Initiatives that help reduce carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
↓ page 31

Hmwk: pg 36 #2,4

2.1 Population and Resources
Population - all the individuals of a species that occupy a particular geographic area at a certain time

How do you increase the population of one species?
Reproduction rate: increase (reproduction rare is greater than death rate) 
Death Rate: decrease

Exponential Growth - accelerating population growth that produces a J-shaped curve when the population is graphed against time (pg. 49)
E.G. Elephants (fig 2.1), Turkeys, Yellow Perch
This is not sustainable in nature because of limiting factors

Limiting factor- a factor that limits the growth, distribution, or amount of a population in an ecosystem (e.g. land, food, resources, etc.)

Carrying capacity- the size of a population that can be supported indefinitely by the available resources and services of an ecosystem
Beyond this carrying capacity, no additional individuals can be supported long term
When a population is maintained at its carrying capacity, it is at an equilibrium
Example 1: (Fig 2.5)
	Pg. 51 fur seals in the 1900s (curve flatten)
Example 2:
Flying squirrels - limited by available habitat


Urban Sprawl - the growth of relatively low-density development on the edges of urban areas
As the growth of the population is near the edge of the city, more new homes and businesses are seen there (suburbia)
Increased dependency on automobiles
Decreased farmlands as roads are built
Decreased carrying capacities for plants/animals
                                          ↪Less space for habitats and resources
Example: Redside Dace (fish)
Pg. 53

Intensification Policy- set by Ontario to keep newly developed buildings to be within the city boundary
Increase Population density
Decrease Pressure on natural areas and farmland




2.2 Interaction Among Species


2.3 Human Niches

Sustainable use – use that does not lead to long-term depletion of a resource or affect the diversity of the ecosystem from which the resources is obtained
Helps meet the needs of present and future generations
If humans do not use resources in a sustainable way, our _______ may shrink again over time
Ecological niche – the way an organism occupies a position in an ecosystem, including all the necessary biotic and abiotic factors (i.e. the role that they play in the ecosystem including the resources that they use)
Humans constantly increase their own carrying capacity due to improvements in medical care, technology, agriculture, education
Human population has had a steady but not explosive growth up until the 1400s  
Before the 1400s it took the world’s population ~650 years to double 
Since then, the doubling time for the world’s population was only 60(See Fig 2.18)
Doubling Time – the period of time that is required for a population to double in size
Ecological Footprint – a measure of the impact of an individual or a population on the environment in terms of energy consumption, land use and waste production
Measures the amount of land/water needed to support an individual’s standard of living 
The average Canadians ecological footprint is well above the world average(Fig. 2.19) 
My Ecological Footprint: 69.420 Earths would be needed if the earth’s population shared my lifestyle
Sustainability – use of Earth’s resources, including land and water, at levels that can continue forever
Accomplished through consuming fewer resources and using existing resources more efficient through technological innovation, energy efficiency and recycling

3.1 Measuring Biodiversity
Biodiversity – the number and variety of organisms found within a specific region
Protect – to guard legally from harm a species that is listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern.
3.2 Communities
Community – all the populations of the different species that interact in a specific area or ecosystem
Species that can greatly affect their community
Dominant Species – species that are so abundant that they have the biggest biomass of any community member

In terrestrial environments, the species with the largest biomass are 
plants (primary producers)

Removing the dominant species in an ecosystem, will 
decrease biodiversity
For example,  all American chestnut trees were killed by an accidentally introduced fungus in 1950, birds/mammals were not affected but instead  7 North American species of insects 
became extinct
Keystone Species – a species that can greatly affect populations numbers and the health of an ecosystem
Generally not abundant
Can be plants or animals
Examples:
Prairie dogs build burrows in huge colonies , a.k.a. “dog towns”.  They were once hunted and hunted as they were seen as farm pests.  This keystone species is important to help increase plant diversity, turning tonnes of soil, increasing nitrogen content of the soil, and allowing deeper water penetration of soil.
b)Captive Breeding – the breeding of rare or endangered wildlife in controlled settings to increase the population size

They are grown in places like the zoo, following a program that trains them to capture wild prey, avoid natural risks encountered in the wild, and then they are then reintroduced into the wild
Ecosystem Engineer – a species that causes such dramatic changes to landscapes that it creates a new ecosystem
E.g. beavers can convert a small stream in a forest into an aquatic ecosystem
Ponds create calm, slower waters  and a easier food supply for juvenile fish, migrating birds,  and aquatic insects
Tree-cutting activities creates clearings in the forest

Succession – the series of changes in an ecosystem that occurs over time, following a disturbance


Homework: Pg.99# 2-4














4.1 Particle Theory of Matter
1. All matter is made up of tiny particles
Matter is made up of 3 states - solid, liquid and gas
Most energy - gas, liquid, solid
2. All particles of one substance are the same. Different substances are made up of different particles.				
3. The spaces between particles are large compared to the sizes of the particles themselves.
4. The particles are always moving. The more energy (the higher the temperature) the particles have, the faster they move.
5. There are attractive forces among the particles. These forces are stronger when the particles are closer together

Classification Tree
Matter - Anything that has mass and space. 
Matter can be broken down into two categories: mixture and pure substances

Mixture - Matter that contains more than one kind of particle
Pure Substance - Matter that contains only one kind of particle

Mechanical Mixtures (Heterogenous) - You can see two or more phases/sections
Example: Water and oil
Solutions (Homogenous) : You only see one phase/section
	Example: Salt water
Elements: Cannot be broken down into simpler parts
	Example: K - Potassium, H - Hydrogen, C - Carbon
Compounds: Made up of two or more elements
	Example: H2O - Water, CO2 - Carbon dioxide, NaCl - Table salt

Air - Solution
Blank Paper - Solution
Egg Salad - Mechanical Mixture

Homework - Read pg 142-144 Q #4, 5, 8 on page 148

4) The two classes of pure substances are elements and compounds. An example of an element is potassium. An example of a compound is Water.
5a) Salt water is not a pure substance because it contains more than one kind of particle. It is a solution.
5b) Gold is a pure substance because it only has one kind of particle. If it is pure gold - 24k gold.
5c) A pencil is not a pure substance because it contains more than one kind of particle. It is a mechanical mixture.
8) Circle on top of Triangle. Heterogeneous mixture - a triangle with 3 circles around it

Name: __________________ Date: ______________ 
4.2 Physical Properties 
These are the characteristics of a substance that can be observed and measured without  changing the identity of the substance. 
Qualitative Physical Property - observed and described without detailed measurement  Item Being Observed: Laptop 







4.2 Quantitative Physical Property - measured and assigned a particular value


Name: __________________ Date: ______________ 


Density = 
Mass (g) and volume (cm3)

Example: a sample of silver had a mass of 5.04 g and a volume of 0.480 cm3. What is the density of the silver?

GRASS
Given - mass = 5.04 g, volume = 0.480 cm3
Required - find density
Analysis - D =  
Solve - D = 5.04 g/0.480 cm2  = 10.5g/cm3
Statement - Therefore the density of silver would be 10.5g/cm3


Homework: Read pages 149-156. Answer questions #3, 4 on page 159. Add examples to the quantitative column
Asynchronous on Monday: Page 157 #1-5, Page 159 #6,7



4.3 Chemical Properties 
This is the ability of a substance to change (react) and form new substances. This includes: • Reactivity with other substances 
o Water 

Calcium Oxide + water = acetylene gas - useful for making lights
o Oxygen
Aluminum + O2  = Aluminum Oxide - prevents weathering
o Acids 
Acids + baking soda = CO2 - good for baking 
o Another pure substance, etc. 
• Combustibility - the ability of a substance to burn in the air 

Ex. propane + oxygen = heat released
• Stability - the ability of a substance to remain unchanged
The more stable ,the longer a substance can keep its function
• Toxicity - the ability of a substance to cause harmful effects in plants and animals

Ex. Clostridium tetani is very poisonous -> LDso -> it can kill 50% exposed population
Toxicity + stability can work together and make something more harmful. For example: DDT -> bioaccumulates and biomagnifies 

Read pg. 160-164
Answer pg. 165 #2,3,5,8

2) Yes. The gas is a new substance so new molecules must have been formed
3) It is a chemical property because it reacted and changed and became rusted iron
5) A chemical property of propane is combustion 
8) A substance that is both highly toxic and highly stable will have a greater detrimental effect than a substance that is either easily broken down or only slightly toxic 

Review Unit 1

Density 
Atom
Element
Chemical 
Compound
a) physical  b) physical  c) chemical  d) chemical  e) physical  f) physical  g) chemical
The elements must be chemically combined to form the compound so the elements do not have their original properties. The elements are physically mixed to form a mixture so each element keeps its identity and properties. An example of a mixture is when oxygen and nitrate are mixed. An example of a compound is when nitrogen dioxide is formed in lighting bulbs. 
The particles in a pure substance are identical therefore the pure substance has the identical therefore the pure substances 
 
Sample A has the greater density. It contains more mass in the same volume. In the equation d=m/v, the larger the mass is the larger the density becomes.
The substance must be soluble in water
a) aluminum-element   b) air-mixture   






5.1 Evolution of the atomic model
Atom- the smallest particle of an element that retains the identity of that element

John Dalton
John Dalton ran an electric current through water and observed hydrogen and oxygen being formed with their very different properties

Dalton’s Atomic Theory


Thomson’s New Atomic Model







Isotopes 
Isotopes - One of two or more forms of an element that has the same number of protons but a different number of neutrons. 

Carbon-12 has 6 neutrons and 6 protons
Carbon-13 has 7 neutrons and 6 protons
Carbon-14 has 8 neutrons and 6 protons









5.3 The Periodic Table

Background history
By the mid-1800s chemists have discovered more than 50 elements and needed a way to organize all the information
In the Late 1860s, a Russian chemist, Dimitri Mendeleev organized the periodic table
He organized the table according to the atomic mass (the average mass of the naturally occurring isotopes of an element)
He noticed a periodically repeating patterns and so it was called the periodic table ( a system for organizing the elements into columns and rows, so that elements with similar properties are in the same column)
The gaps that were left in the table allowed mendeleev to predict the properties of unknown elements
It is not in standard atomic notation but it includes the name symbol, atomic number, atomic mass and ion charge
Most elements with an atomic number less than 93 is natural, other are synthetic (created by scientists) these are usually very unstable (only exists for a fraction of a second)
The Periodic Table
Metals - (left) typically an element that is hard, shiny, malleable and ductile, and is a good conductor of heat and electricity
Non-metals - (right) typically, an element that is not shiny, malleable, nor ductile, and is a poor conductor of heat and electricity
Metaloid - (middle) an element that shares some properties with metals and some properties with non-metals  
Period - a horizontal row of the elements in the periodic table
Group - a vertical column of elements in the periodic table, a.k.a. Family
They share very similar physical and chemical properties
4 Well-Known Groups
Halogens
Group 17
highly reactive because valence electrons only have ⅞ which is unstable because it is right next to the noble gases
Extremely corrosive
Chlorine and iodine are often used as disinfectants
Alkali metals
Group 1 (except hydrogen) 
Low melting points
Very soft
Highly reactive (usually stored in kerosene or oil)
Alkaline-Earth metals
Group 2
Highly reactive but less reactive than alkali metals
Can produce very bright colourful flames when burnt (often used for fireworks)

Noble gases
Group 18
Odourless
Colourless
Gasses at room temperature
Not reactive (used to fill light bulbs)
Metals in the Environment
Gold is a common metal that is mined
> 85% that is mined is used for non-essential items like jewellery
A cyanide-based chemical is used to extract the gold
If cyanide-is leaked into the soil, it would be extremely toxic for humans and wildlife 
Metals are not only important as a material, but it is also found in living things. In our bodies, iron helps us transport oxygen through our blood. If too much of a particular metal is found in our body, it can be harmful
Some toxic metals for animals and the environment include mercury, lead and aluminum
Most mercury (not all) found in the environment is a result of human activities such as burning waste materials and coal

Reactivity and Atom Size
The farther the valence electrons are from the nucleus, the more easily they can be lost and therefore the more reactive the element is
As atomic size increase, reduced pull of the electrons toward the nucleus causes an increase in atom size
Reactivity increases as well




Unit 5 Review Questions
 
The diagram shown has four valence electrons, so the one immediately to its right on the periodic table will have five valence electrons
An atom of phosphorus has five valence electrons. An atom of aluminum has three valence electrons. So an atom of phosphorus has more valence electrons than an atom or aluminum.
Silicon also has four valence electrons and can react with a variety of other elements. It is directly below carbon in the periodic table.
Noble gases have a full outer energy level of energy, which provides chemical stability. Halogens, however, are capable of holding one more electron in their valence shell. Elements that only need to lose or gain one electron to have the same electron arrangement as a noble gas are very reactive
Atoms get larger as you read from left to right across a row. Atoms get larger as you read down a column.
An atom of sulfur is larger because it has one more energy level of electrons
Calcium is more reactive than magnesium because a calcium atom has one more energy level, and is therefore larger, than a magnesium atom. The farther the valence electrons are from the nucleus of an atom, the easier it is for the electrons to be lost, and therefore the atom is more reactive. 
Similar model to figure 5.25 - page 210
A potassium atom has one more energy level, and is therefore larger, than a sodium atom. The farther the valence electrons are from the nucleus of an atom, the easier it is for the electrons to be lost, and therefore the atom is more reactive




































6.1 & 6.2 Ionic and Covalent Bonds
Summary of Physical Properties: 


Remember! Noble gases are the most stable (and least reactive) because their outer  energy level has a full set of electrons.  
Other elements can achieve a full energy level by gaining , losing or sharing  electrons. (Atoms cannot gain, lose, or share protons). 


Ionic Compounds 
When an atom gains or loses its electrons, the atoms then becomes an ion. -> charge

∙ When an atom loses electron(s), it then has more protons and less electrons so it becomes  a positively charged ion 
∙ When an atom gains electron(s), it then has more electrons and less protons so it becomes  a negatively charged ion 
E.g. For Mg to achieve the same number of valence electrons as its nearest noble gas, Neon, it  must give 2 electrons, this then gives it a 2+ charge


Compounds are linked by chemical bonds. Ionic bonds are one type of  chemical bond that forms between oppositely charged ions, thus, forming an Ionic compound. Ionic compounds involve electrons being transferred from one  atom to another. This loss and gain allows each ion to have a full outer shell of electrons. 
Usually, ionic compounds consist of a metal and a non-metal. Why? 
Metals tend to give electrons and non-metals tend to receive electrons



Example: sodium + chloride 
What is sodium fluoride used for? 
Sodium fluoride is used to reduce cavities and to reduce tooth decay.

	+    







Why did Canadian provinces add sodium fluoride to their drinking water? What was the controversy? 
Some say it is harmful because if there is too much of it, it can develop cancer, fragile bones, improper brain development in children. 
What do ionic compounds have to do with fertilizers? What are the pros and cons of fertilizers?
Ammonium phosphate, ammonium nitrate, potassium chloride
Pros: Causes plants to grow faster and there is a greater yield in less space. Less spoilage and lower labour costs. 
Cons: runs off into waterways which disrupts ecosystems. Makes algae grow and the algae uses up all oxygen and then fish can’t breathe. 
What makes the best conductors? Name two mentioned in the text. 
When electrons or ions are free to move, metals, ionic compounds in a liquid state/melted
Why do we add salt to the road in the winter? 
Makes ice formation difficult, lowers freezing point of water => prevents ice formation
What are some negative effects of road salt in the environment? Name three. 
Increased corrosion + rusting of iron, inhibit/slow plant growth, increased salt consumption by people can lead to heal complications, negatively affect aquatic plant and animal species

Covalent Compounds 
A covalent compound is formed when atoms share a pair of electrons to form a  covalent bond. In this bond, the shared electrons are attracted to the nuclei of  both atoms. Since there is no transferral of electrons, the atoms remain uncharged.  The atoms are tied together – like a game of tug-of-war. Atoms achieve their full outer energy  levels, and stability, by sharing their valence electrons. 
A covalently bonded compound is called a molecule which can include two or  more atoms of the same elements or different elements.  






Example: H2O                                                                                 Example: O2 


Molecular compounds are named based on the element in the compound AND the  number of each element.  




Molecular compounds contain strong attraction within the molecule, but  weaker attraction between molecules. This explains much of the physical properties of  molecules. 
How does Coca-Cola demonstrate the solubility of molecular compounds? 
Plastics are made of molecules! What are some pros and cons of plastics?

Pg 231 #1, 2 



How can a negative ion form from an atom?
When it takes an electron
A. ionic
B. not ionic
C. not ionic
D. ionic

Read Pg 233-239 Pg 241 #1,4,7
1.a) Molecular
   b) Ionic
   c) Molecular 
   d) Molecular
4. The model correctly represents a covalent compound because it has a complete set of valence electrons on its outer shell and complete each other's outer shell by sharing.
7. Most molecular compounds are poor electrical conductors because they have a weak       attraction between the molecules and they aren’t free ions. 

Naming Covalent Compounds
PCl5 
ClFl3
SO2
N2O5
SFl6
O2Cl2
CI4







Unit 6 review 
Pg 260 #1-13, 14a,b,c, 15, 17-19, 22

Which of the following is a chemical property?
Reactivity with water is a chemical property

Who was the first scientist to discover that atoms are divisible?
Thompson was the first scientist to discover that atoms are divisible.

A sodium atom is composed of 11 protons, 12 neutrons and 11 electrons. Which of the following describes the particles that make up an ion of this isotope of sodium?
11 protons, 12 neutrons and 10 electrons make up an ion of this isotope of sodium 

In which family would you expect to find an element that is very reactive with water whose atoms have one valence electron?
Alkali metals are very reactive with water and have one valence electron

Which of the following is a molecular compound?
CCl4 is a molecular compound because both carbon and chlorine are nonmetals. 

Describe each of the following physical properties of matter and provide an example of each one. 
Boiling point: the temperature at which something becomes a gas
Example: Water boils at 100°c

Electrical conductivity: The ability of electricity to pass through a substance
Example: Metals have a high electrical conductivity 

Solubility: The ability to dissolve\
Example: Sugar in hot water

A sample has a mass of 15g and a volume of 6.0cm3. Calculate the density of the sample 
Given: Mass- 15g    Volume: 6.0cm3
Required: Find density 
Analyze: M/V = D
Solve: 15g/6.0cm3 = 2.5g/cm3
Statement: Therefore the density of the sample is 2.5g/cm3

Iron has a density of 7.87g/cm3. What is the mass of a 2.50cm3 piece of iron?
Given: Density - 7.87g/cm3        Volume - 2.50cm3
Required: find mass
Analyze: M/V=D    M=DxV
     	Solve: 7.87g/cm3 x 2.50cm3 = 19.675g
	Statement: Therefore the mass of the piece of iron is 19.675 grams

A laboratory technician has measured the following data for two liquids that are insoluble in each other.
Liquid A: 5.0 mL has a mass of 6.8 g
Liquid B: 2.5 mL has a mass of 2.3 g
If these liquids are added to the same flask and allowed to separate into two layers, which liquid would be on top? Explain why. 
Liquid A: density = 1.36g/ml3
Liquid B: density = 1.09g/ml3
Liquid B would be on top of Liquid A because it has less density than Liquid A

Identify two physical properties and one chemical property of water
Physical: Boiling point = 100°c    Melting point =  0°c
Chemical: Water reacts with alkali metals. No Combustibility.

What is the charge associated with each type of particle
A proton - positive 
An electron - negative
An ion formed by gaining an electron - negative

Describe the relative mass of a proton, a neutron and an electron
An electron has a mass of about 1/1836 the mass of a proton. A neutron is very slightly more massive than a proton.

How does an atom’s valence electrons influence the element's chemical properties
Atoms with a full shell are non-reactive. Atoms with one or two electrons tend to lose them; atoms lacking one or two electrons tend to gain them




Draw a Bohr-Rutherford diagram for each atom or ion




Determine the number of protons, electrons and neutrons in each atom
Protons: 6     Electrons: 6    Neutrons: 7
Protons: 24    Electrons: 24    Neutrons: 28
Protons: 16    Electrons: 16    Neutrons: 16
Protons: 7    Electrons: 7    Neutrons: 7

Distinguish among the terms atomic number, atomic mass and mass number
Atomic Number: The number of protons in the nucleus of an atom, which determines the chemical properties of an element and its place in the periodic table.
Atomic mass: the mass of an element
Mass number: Number of protons + neutrons 

Explain how the size of the atoms changes as you move down a family in the periodic table. 
As atomic size increase, reduced pull of the electrons toward the nucleus causes an increase in atom size
As you go down it gets bigger because it has more layers of electrons
	
List the steps you would take to deal with each situation safely.
Unplug the hot plate, and take the liquid off the hot plate before leaving the room
Remove the test tube from the flame. Let the test tube cool, preferably in a wire test tube rack. Dispose of any chemicals as directed by the teacher. When is it cool, discard the test tube in the broken glass receptacle, tube down.







Use the information in the following table to answer the questions below.
Element B, Calcium, Group 2.
Element C because it has a full shell of valence electrons
Element A because it gains electrons when becoming neon (noble gas)
Element C, Argon is a Noble gas and was discovered last.
Element B, Calcium is the only metal.



Unit 1 chemistry test
True or false
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
T

Multiple Choice
B
B
C
B
D
C
B
A
B
D

Short Answer
A - Mixture
B - Pure substance
C - Solution
Conductivity, malleability, hardness

G: V = 22cm3     M = 34g
R: find density
A: D = M/V
S: D = 34g/22cm3
        = 1.55g/cm3
S: Therefore the density of the unknown material is 1.55g/cm3
.
.
1. COVALENT 2. IONIC 3. COVALENT 4. IONIC
1. O2F2     2. NI3      3. CF4     4.P2D5








7.1 Ancient Astronomy
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1TaoY74lu29aTvtefJwxr68MIrwUgA2PL/view  





7.2 The Constellations
The constellations
Many cultures imagined that the patterns formed by the stars in the night sky represented people, animals and objects. A constellation is a group of stars that seems to form a distinctive pattern in the sky. 

Patterns in the night sky
Stars in a constellation appear to lie close together and at the same distance to Earth. However, they may actually be many light years apart.

For example: Take a closer look at Cassiopeia (“the seated queen”)

A light year is the distance that light travels in one year (about 9.5 x 1012 km)


Star Maps
Star maps are used to show constellations and individual stars. Star maps represent the stars by dots of varying sizes. Therefore, the larger the dot, the brighter the star.
Astronomers use the term apparent magnitude when describing the brightness of the star

Apparent Magnitude
Greek astronomer Hipparchus was first to develop a magnitude scale for star “brightness”

The number 1 was assigned to the brightest star.
The numbers 2-6 were assigned sequentially fainter stars (i.e. A star of magnitude 6 is about the faintest star that the unaided human eye can see)

Today, the stellar magnitude scale goes beyond magnitude 6 and into the minus range as well. For example the Sun has a magnitude of -26

Names of Constellations
The International Astronomical Union (IAU) is responsible for naming and classifying the celestial objects

IAU lists 88 official constellations. Some examples include Orion, Cassiopeia, and Cancer. Many names come from Greek and Latin names that represent mythical figures.

Asterisms:
Asterisms are smaller groups of stars that form patterns within a constellation. An example of a asterism is The Big Dipper


The Big Dipper
One of the most visible star patterns in the northern sky

It’s part of a large constellation Ursa Major (the great bear)

Polaris and pointer stars
The Big Dipper’s two end stars care called pointer stars because they point to polaris, the North Star
(Draw diagram of Big dipper as a pointer to polaris)


Polaris (“the North Star”)
For thousands of years people in the northern hemisphere used Polaris to tell direction
Earth’s rotational axis points to Polaris

Viewing Different Constellations
At different times in the year you can see different constellations because of the Earth’s revolution around the Sun

The constellations you can see also depend on your latitude
If you move south, constellations that were out of view will rise above the southern horizon
Hw; pg 282 #3-5
7.3 Movements of Earth and the Moon

Earth’s Motion
The earth goes through rotation (around its axis) and revolution (around the sun). Due to its rotation, celestial objects appear to rise from the east and set in the west. Due to its revolution, different constellations are visible at different times in the year.

The earth rotates around the sun in an eclipse (oval-shaped).


Seasons
The earth is always tilted at a 23.5 degree angle. Sunlight strikes the Earth’s surface at different angles, which differs the amount of sunlight received. Light hitting at an angle is less concentrated (and more spread out) than light hitting at a more direct (i.e. 90 degree angle)

Diagram 1: 1 is more concentrated and 2 is less concentrated
Diagram 2: 1 is less concentrated and 2 is more concentrated

The Moon’s Motion
The moon orbits around the Earth in 29.5 days. The moon only rotates once around its axis during this orbit. Hence, earth only gets to see one side of the moon since this same side is always facing us (though in 1959, we got a glimpse of the other side). The other side of the moon (aka. “The darkside of the moon”) does not receive much sunlight.

The monthly progression of changes in the appearance of the Moon which result from different portions of the Moon’s sunlit side being visible from the Earth are called the phases.
(see fig. 7.17 on page 286)

Eclipses
-> Phenomenon in which one celestial object moves in front of another celestial object 

Lunar Eclipse
This is the phenomenon in which the moon passes into Earth’s shadow (the umbra) The moon is actually tilted 5 degrees from the moon’s orbit (FIg 7.19). This is why a lunar eclipse doesn’t happen every month, but twice a year. 


Solar Eclipse
This is the phenomenon where the shadow of the moon falls on the Earth’s surface. Even though the Sun is 400 times larger than the Moon, since the distance between the Sun and Earth is 400 times further than the distance between the Earth and the Moon, which makes the Moon appear to cover most of the Sun. It is never safe to stare directly at a solar eclipse.

Pg 288

Tides
Tides are caused by a gravitational force (The force of attraction between all masses in the universe) This tidal force is caused by the difference between the force of gravity on the side of Earth nearest the Moon and the force of gravity on the side of Earth farthest from the Moon - hence, causing a stretching effect on the earth

3 people running for the bus holding hands in a line.

page 289


Homework page 290. #2,3,6

7.4 Meet your Solar System


Why is Pluto no longer considered a planet?
The reason Pluto is no longer considered a planet is due to it sharing an orbit in the Kuiper Belt and also sometimes sharing orbit with Neptune, thereby excluding it from the name of planet, as well as it being very small. The size of it makes it a dwarf planet, though it is still the largest “planet” in the Kuiper belt. 


Put the Planets in descending order of…

Radius (km): Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, Earth, Venus, Mars, Mercury

Size (ie: relative to Earth): Jupiter, Saturn, Neptune, Uranus, Earth, Venus, mars, Mercury

Temperature: Venus, Mercury, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune

Day Length: Venus, Mercury, Mars, Earth, Uranus, Neptune, Saturn, Jupiter

Year Length: Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Earth, Venus, Mercury

Number of Moons: Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, Mars, Earth, Venus, Mercury









7.5 other objects in the solar system



8.2 Exploring The Sun

Solar Nebula Theory
This is the theory that describes how stars and planets form from contracting spinning disks of gas and dust
Nebula - a vast cloud of gas and dust, which may be the birthplaces of stars/planets
Star - a celestial object made of hot gases, mainly hydrogen and some helium
Protostar - a hot and dense object that is at the centre of a nebula

Solar System Formation
Gas and dust particles gather in the centre of a spinning cloud.
The spinning nebula begins to contract and tiny grains begin to collect, building up into bigger, rocky lumps called planetesimals.
These planetesimals may eventually develop into planets.

Solar Nebula Theory
As a nebula collapses and contracts, gas compresses and temperature increases. This increase in temperature causes nuclear fusion (the process of energy production in which hydrogen nuclei combine to form helium).
The protostar then converts more hydrogen fuel to helium in the protostar’s ore and the core heats up, increasing pressure and temperature. Pressure then tries to push out, where gravity pulls in. When gravity and pressure are balanced, a stable star is formed (e.g. the Sun).
As more Helium settles into a star's core, the core grows larger, that is, stars are getting larger.

Support for the Solar Nebula Theory
Earlier solar systems were cluttered and disorganized as dust/rock orbited the new Sun
This dust/rock would commonly collide with planets and moons resulting in the cratered surfaces you see on the planets/moon
As the nebula continues to spin, it flattens into a disk-like shape spinning in one direction. Now it is observed that most things in our solar system revolve in the same direction and more or less on the same plane of this disk.
Due to star-formation, planets should be fairly common - and they are, there are 300 extrasolar planets orbiting the other stars.

Birth of the Solar System Video seen in Class:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B1AXbpYndGc

Sunspots on the photosphere
The surface of the sun is called the photosphere
It is thousands of km deep
Areas of strong magnetic fields called sunspots, are visible as dark spots
They appear dark because they are 1500 degrees celsius cooler than the rest of the photosphere which is 6000 degrees celsius
It has been observed that sunsports closer to the Sun’s poles take 35 days to complete one rotation, and the sunsports near the Sun’s equator take about 27 days to complete one rotation. What does this mean?
The sun rotates faster at the equator than at its poles (and not as one solid body like the Earth)
Solar Flares
Solar flares are fast moving charged particles which are ejected by the Sun into the solar system
They occur where a complex groups of sunspots are 
When these solar flares hit the Earth, they are called solar wind which can…
Disrupt telecommunications
Overload electrical power networks (causing blackouts)
Result in _ after charging the gases in the Earth’s upper atmosphere
Aurora Borealis in the North Pole, aurora australis in the South Pole

Solar Energy…
Powers wind and ocean currents
Drives All Weather (winds, hurricanes, etc.)
Provides energy needed for photosynthesis at the base of the food chain
Solar radiation	

Birth of the Solar System Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B1AXbpYndGc
Solar Winds video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SYRpXZjkHlU
Aurora Borealis: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FcfWsj9OnsI





   8.3 Exploring other stars.
The Life Cycle of the Star



Determining the composition of Stars
A spectroscope is used to analyze light from stars to identify the elements that are within that star’s photosphere
Spectroscope - an optical instrument that produces a spectrum from a narrow beam of light
Spectral lines - certain specific wavelengths within a spectrum characterized by lines; spectral lines identify specific chemical elements
Determining the Mass of Stars
Most of the stars seen from Earth are binary stars -i.e. Two stars that orbit each other
Using the orbital radius and time it takes for one orbit, astronomers are able to calculate the mass of each star
The Hertzsprung-Russell Diagram
This is a graph that compares the properties of stars.
The y-axis may show absolute magnitude or luminosity
Absolute magnitude is the brightness of a star if it were placed 32.6 light years away from Earth
Luminosity is a star’s brightness measured in Joules per second (J/s)

The main sequence accounts for 90% of the stars that you can see from Earth
Questions about why some stars are not in the main sequence led astronomers to wonder how these stars came to be. Many puzzles still remain…..


9.1 Galaxies
Milky way
This is our galaxy that includes other solar systems
Appears as a hazy white band in the night sky (brightest in the summer)
Observed by William Herschel in 1780
Contains ~100 billion stars
Galaxies
Galaxy - a huge collection of stars, planets, gas and dust that is held together by gravity
There are 3 types of galaxies
Spiral l- appears like a flattened pinwheel with many long arms spiralling out from a bulging centre core
E.G. the Milky Way and Andromeda
Elliptical- appears like a stretched out eclipse or a sphere.
Includes some of the oldest stars, and largest galaxies
Irregular
From Smallest to Largest….
Earth
Solar System (planets, moons, Sun)
Star Clusters- a collection of stars held together by gravity
Open cluster - a collection of 50 to 1000 stars; open clusters appear along the main band of the Milky Way
Globular cluster - a collection of 100,000 to a million stars arranged in a distinctive spherical shape; globular clusters appear around the centre of the 
The Milky Way
Local Group (-40 galaxies) the small group of galaxies that include the Milky Way
Superclusters - a gigantic cluster of 4 to 25 clusters of galaxies which is hundred of millions of light years in size


9.2 The Universe
The Expanding Universe
Doppler Effect
The change in frequency of a light source due to its motion relative to an observer; also, the change in pitch of a sound due to the motion of the source relative to an observer
Observed by Edwin Hubble
Redshift - when objects move away from the observer and their wavelengths are lengthened, toward the red end of the visible spectrum
Blueshift - when objects move toward the observer and their wavelengths are shortened, toward the blue end of the visible spectrum
The Big Bang Theory
It is theorized that this event may have triggered the expansion of the universe 14 billion years ago
Cosmologists observe that in the distant past, the universe was extremely compact, small and dense. There was no “before” this time and space. “No one” knows what caused this “beginning” that started from a hot, dense state and went through a violent expansion

9.3 Unsolved Mysteries
Dark Matter
Stars are observed to be moving around the centre of their galaxies at speeds faster than predicted. Why?
Dark Matter - the most abundant form of matter in the universe; invisible to telescopes
Has not been detected, but when a “missing” mass was located, it did not emit any light
Dark Energy
The universe is expanding, and its rate of expansion is increasing. Why?
Dark Energy- a form of energy that makes up nearly three quarters of the universe; has the effect of increasing the expansion of the universe
Still not identified

Space Review:





10.1 Static Electricity  
∙ Static electricity is seen in plastic wrap, lightning bolts, clothing stuck to  each other when taken out of the dryer, etc. 
∙ Electricity – form of energy that results from the interaction of charged particles,  such as electrons or protons 
∙ Static Charge (a.k.a. Static electricity) – electric charge that tends to stay on the surface of an object, rather than flowing away quickly 
Charging by Friction  
∙ Static charge can build up through “charging by friction” 
o a process in which objects made from different materials rub against each other, producing a net static charge on each other 
o Examples: 
∙ causes negative charge because one material has a  
Attraction to electrons than the other material 
o electrons are pulled (or transferred) from the material  that has a weaker attraction to electrons 
o Both materials then become charged
∙ Only electrons can be transferred as they  have small mass and are far from the nucleus 
∙ An object with an excess of electrons has a negative charge (more e than  p+) 
∙ An object with a deficit of electrons has a positive charge (less e than  p+) 

Electrostatic Series  
∙ This is a list of materials that have been arranged according to hold on to electrons (pg. 405, Table 10.1) 
∙ Created based on experiments
∙ Materials closer to the bottom of the list become negatively charged after being  rubbed with materials that are closer to the top of the list (which are positively charged) 
∙ Different sources often list the materials in a different order, because the  surface layer on a material can slightly change its properties
∙ Different animals have fur with also different characteristics (e.g. rabbit  and dog fur) 
 
Clothes in the Tumble Dryer  
∙ Charging by friction also occurs in a tumble dryer
∙ Nylon socks get attached to cotton shirts 
∙ An anti-static has a waxy compound on it, the hot air vaporizes the  waxy compound and this coats the clothes, making the clothes behave as if they were  made of the same material – hence preventing static charges to build up 
Conductors and Insulators 
∙ Conductor – a material in which electrons can move easily between atoms 
o e.g. metals in wires 
∙ Insulators – a material in which electrons cannot move easily between atoms
o e.g. non-metals and rubber/plastic surrounding wires 
∙ semiconductor– a material in which electrons can move fairly well  between atoms 
o e.g. silicon 
∙ Pure water is a good insulator , but as it is a good solvent and rarely  pure, it usually contains dissolved substances which make it a good conductor ∙ 
Ground – an object that can supply a very large number of electrons  to, or can remove a very large number of electrons from, a charged object, thus  neutralizing the object 
∙ The earth is only a fair conductor, and it’s capacity to absorb or supply electrons is so  great that it remains neutral overall

10.1 homework: 







Charging by Contact and by Induction 
10.2 Charging by Contact

Electroscopes 
• This is a device for detecting the presence of an electric charge 
Pith ball electroscope - 
• The pith is an insulator covered by a conducting substance. 
• When a charged object comes close, an electric force moves the pith ball. 
Metal Leaf electroscope 
• The metal leaves spread apart when a charge comes near to the sphere 
A rubber stopper is needed 
Charging by Contact 
Generating a charge on a neutral object by touching it with a charged object 
When an object is charged by contact, it gets the 
charge as the object that charged it 

Charging by induction is the movement of electrons, caused by an electric field which does not require physical contact. The neutral Pith ball moves towards the negatively charged rod, and the electrons in the pith ball move towards the side farthest away from the rod, leaving the side closest to the rod positive.

Law of electric charges 
These are laws that describe how two objects interact electrically when one or both are charged 
• Like charges repel 
• Opposite charges attract 
Charged and neutral objects attract each other 
• The amount of net charge on an object depends on the difference between the 
• The strength of the electric force is affected by: 
• the amount of charge of each of the two charged objects 
• distance between two charged objects (similar to things in space) 
• If something is repelled by a negative object, it must have a negative charge
If something is repelled by a positive object, it must have a positive charge
• If something is repelled by a positive AND negative object, it must have a neutral charge
If can 
Electric Field A 
where the effect of its charge can be felt by other objects 
• A charged object can affect other objects in its "field" (just like gravity in space) 
• The strength of the electric field depends on the net charge 
E.g. pith ball being attracted to the rod 
Charging by Induction 
• The movement of electrons in a substance, caused by the electric field of a nearby charged object, without direct contact between the substance and the object 
• The neutral pith ball moves towards the negatively charged rod, and the 
electrons in the pith ball move towards the side farthest away from the rod, leaving the side closest to the rod positive 
Bring a positive rod near the electroscope. 
Ground the electroscope. Electrons from Earth ground balance charge of positive rod. 
Sever ground path and remove positive rod. 




After charging by contact, the pith ball electroscope is left with a negative charge.




10.3 Charges at Work

Air currents cause charge separation within the storm cloud.
Negative charges on the bottom of the cloud induce a positive charge on the ground
below the cloud.
Negative charges on the bottom of the cloud move toward the positive charges in the
ground.
Positive ions jump from the ground and a lightning flash is created.




11.1 Cells and Batteries
Electric circuit - closed path along which electrons that are powered by an energy source can flow

Voltaic Cell  - A source of energy that generates an electric current by Chemical reactions involving two different metals or metal compounds separated by a solution that is a conductor

First one was constructed by Alessandro Volta, an italian physicist, in the 1800s using discs of silver and zinc with a cloth soaked in salt water
Batteries - a connection of two or more cells
Electrode - one of two metal terminals in a cell or battery 
Electrolyte - a solution or paste that conducts charge

E.g. Lemon juice, Gatorade/Powerade/Pocari Sweat

Electrons move through the circuit and everything in it including the cell, electrolyte and electrodes

Types of Cells

Dry cell - its electrolyte is a paste

Wet cell - its electrolyte is a liquid

The thing in the middle - lemon 
Black thing in front of lemon - light bulb
wR

Solar Cells - it converts sunlight into electrical energy



Fuel cell - generates electricity through chemical reactions occurring outside the cell


11.2 Electricity and Highway Analogies


Hmwk: Read pg. 446-453 Complete Q. 1,4,7,8 on pg 454

11.2 Electric Circuits
An analogy makes a Comparison between two existing things that are similar in some ways but different in others.

A model is something that is constructed to give a simplified representation of an object or a process.

Models and analogies allow scientists to make predictions that can't be tested.

An electric circuit is a closed path along which electrons can flow from and return to an energy source.

The cell has two types of poles: Positive pole and a Negative pole.

A switch is a control device that acts as a conductor that can complete or break the circuit it is connected to.

The connecting wires used in a circuit are usually made from copper or aluminum, covered with an insulated material, usually plastic or rubber.

Electrons do not flow through any part of a circuit where there is a gap or break.

Opening a switch creates a gap

A circuit in which there is a gap or break is called an open circuit. 

Movement in Electrons

Electrons will move in random directions if the conductor (e.g. metal wire) is not part of an electric circuit. When this is the case, electrons do not flow in one direction along the wire but they will be frequently colliding with other electrons or irons.

An excess of electrons builds up at one electrode making it negatively charged

The other electrode has a deficit of electrons and is therefore positively-charged. This charge separation creates an electric field along the wires and components in the circuit to which the cell is connected. This electric field exerts a force on the electrons and protons in the circuit.

Flow of electrons

In a solid, only free electrons are able to move. The electric field produced by the cell forces free electrons to move in one direction, even while there are collisions among the electrons. The flow of electrons in a circuit is similar to what happens when a fan is turned on (air molecules are pushed to move in one direction)

Electric Current

Electric current refers to the rate of movement of electric charge. In an electric circuit, the current is due to the flow of electrons. The flow of electrons can be compared to the flow of water in a river.

The electric charge passing by a point in the circuit is measured in terms of a very large number of electrons. The unit of charge is called the coulomb . This is the quantity of charge that is equal to the charge of 6.25 x 1018 electrons. Discovered by French scientist  Charles Augustin Coulomb.

Amperes and Ammeters

Unit of electric current is the ampere (A). A current of 1.0 in a circuit means that 1.0 C of charge passes a given point in the circuit every second. Discovered by a French scientist Andre Marie Ampere. The electric current is measured using an ammeter.

Conventional Current

Electrical engineers describe the direction of electric current of the direction in which a positive charge would move, this is called conventional current.

Electrical Resistance

Electrons collide with ions or other electrons in the solid, which interfere with the flow of electrons (current). Any property of a substance that hinders the flow of electrons is called Electrical Resistance. In a circuit, a resistor decreases the electric current through a component. The number of collisions between electrons and atoms/ions will depend on the molecular constitution (materials). Among metals, only silver has lower electrical resistance than copper. Copper is less expensive than silver.

Loads

Heat is generated because energy is converted from the collisions between electrons and metal ions. This heat is applied in appliances like toasters, hair dryers and room heaters. Any resistor that transforms electrical energy into heat, motion, sound, or light.

Potential Difference (voltage)

The amount of work that is done on each coulomb of charge that moves between the terminals of the cell is the potential difference. Potential energy is the energy due to the position of an object in a field that the object interacts with. Electrical potential energy is the potential energy of charge that interacts with an electric field.

Potential difference = difference in potential energy (J)
Charge (C)

1 J/C is equal to 1 volt. The Volt (V) is the unit for potential difference.
An electric charge does not lose energy when it moves along a perfect conductor with no resistance

11.3 Measuring the properties of simple circuits
https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/756582307057369288/910968017935028294/IMG_0046.jpg 

https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/756582307057369288/910968018035687444/IMG_0047.jpg 


11.4 Measuring Electrical Resistance

Ohm’s Law
George Ohm, a German Physicist found that for most wires, when potential difference (V) or current (A) (I) changed, the resistance of a wire ® stayed the same

Ohm’s Law - the ratio of potential difference to current is a constant called resistance

R = V / I

V - potential difference ( V : volts )
I - current ( I : amps )
R - resistance ( ohms : Ω ) 


It can also be written as: V = R x I, I = V/R
The larger the resistance, the smaller the current
The smaller the resistance, the larger the current
 
Ex. 1:
A television that is plugged into a wall socket has a potential difference of 120V across its terminals. If the television uses a current of 1.45A, what is its resistance?

Solution: 

Given: V = 120V    I = 1.45A
Required: Resistance = ?
Analyse: R = V/I
Solution: R = 120/1.45 = 82.76Ω
Statement: ∴ the resistance of the television is 82.76Ω


Ex. 2: 
An electric toy has a resistance of 120Ω and requires a current of 0.050 A to work properly. How many 1.5V cells does the toy require?

Solution: 

Given: R = 120Ω    I = 0.050A
Required: Volts = ?
Analyse: V = R x I
Solve: V - 120Ω x 0.050A = 6    6V/1.5V = 4
Statement: ∴ the toy requires 4, 1.5V cells





Circle the wire with higher resistance

Copper vs Iron




Short length vs Long length




Thin wire vs thick wire





High temperature vs Low temperature
Note
As temperature increases, atoms and ions move more (vibrate) quickly and have more collisions in their fixed positions

Superconductor - a material through which electric charge can flow with resistance
Dutch physicist, Kamerlingh Onnes found that mercury lost all its electrical resistance when the temperature was low enough
This would mean a superconducting wire would have zero electrical and heat, light and sound energy

Non ohmic conductors - a conductor that does not follow Ohm’s Law
The filament of an incandescent bulb is non-ohmic because its resistance increases with temperature
The greater the resistance of the filament, the more electrical energy is converted to light energy
If this ratio changes as the potential difference varies, the load does not have constant- resistance and does not follow Ohm’s Law








Homework: pg. 464 #1-6, pg. 467 #1-3, 8








Wednesday December 1 - chapter 11 test
December 8 - unit 10,11,12 test












11.5 Series and Parallel Circuits


Homework: pg. 471 #1-6,8





12.1 Electricity at Home 
Direct Current (DC) – current in which charged particles travel through a circuit in only one direction (from the positive to negative terminal) 
∙ Used in many electronic devices (MP3 players, cell phones, flashlights) ∙ We studied DC in Chapter 11 (including in our lab!) 
How Electricity is Distributed to Homes and Businesses 
∙ Source of energy (wind, water, steam, etc.) spins a turbine which moves a  magnet and wire coil that then generates an electric field causing  electrons to move 
o This creates alternating current (AC) - current in which electrons move back and forth  in a circuit (no net movement of electrons in the current) 
o Carried through the transmission lines – with low current and  
High potential difference. 
Transformer  – an electrical device that changes the size of the potential difference of  an alternating current 
o Can be a step up transformer or a stepdown transformer 
∙ See Fig 12.3 
∙ After passing through the substations and transmissions lines to the box or pole step down transformer near your home, three wires go into the meter of your home. Of the three  wires, two are live wires and one is ground wire.  
∙ The meter, which measures the amount of electrical energy your household has used, is  read by the utility company regularly.  
∙ After the meter, the electricity goes through the distribution panel (which is made  up of circuit breaker or fuses) and leads to different appliances and wall  outlets in your home. 
o E.g. Electric oven would require 240V, wall outlets would supply 120V
o These are connected in parallel, but these entire parallel connections are  connected in series with the circuit breaker or fuse
Page #: ____ 



Electrical Safety Equipment in the Home



10 marks multiple choice and matching. 10 marks = calculation w/ grass.10 mark = short answer. DRAWING A CIRCUIT FOR A QUESTION




12.2 Using Electrical Energy Wisely




Sample Problem:
A hair dryer has a power rating of 1200W. You use it 10 min each school day in the morning when it costs 8.8¢/kWh. What is the cost of drying your hair on all five school days?
Cost of Electrical energy = energy used x price (kWh) x (/kWh)

Power = 1200W = 1.2KW
Time = 10 min/day x 5 days = 50 min/60min(hr) = 0.833 hours
Energy used = power x time
= 1.2 KW x 0.833h
		= 1.0 kw/h
Cost = energy used x price
        = 1.0kw/h x 8.8¢/kw/h
        = 8.8¢
Therefore it costs 8.8¢ to blow dry your hair



Useful energy output -  Actual amount of energy needed to accomplish a task
Total energy input - The total needed + wasted energy needed to accomplish a task

VS 
100 hp -> 95 hp -> 100 hp (healed(wasted 25 hp))
Potions: 30 hp

500 ml of water needs 168 KJ of energy to boil. Which appliance is more efficient to boil the water?
Kettle - power: 1.5kw    time: 132s
Microwave - power: 1.2kw    time: 280s

Percent efficient: useful energy output(KJ) x 100 / useful energy input(KJ)

Kettle: 1.5KW x 132s = 198kws = 198kj
Percent Efficiency = 168kj x 100 / 198 kj = 85%

Microwave: 1.2kw x 280j = 336kws = 336kj
Percent efficiency: 168kj/336kj = 50%
Therefore, use the kettle so you can save money and buy bobux




Hmwk: pg 495 #1-5



12.4 Electricity Generation

UNIT 2 BREAKDOWN: Out of 40. 3 Section. 
1. True or false worth 20 marks. Just General Facts. 
2. Short Answer Worth 10 Marks. One question needs to know electroscopes and how to draw a circuit. No Printer Question.
3. Calculations Worth 10 Marks. ALL THREE TYPES OF CALCULATION. RESISTANCE, CALCULATING ELECTRICAL COST, PERCENT EFFICIENCY. 

Section 7.1 Homework:

1. Celestial Object - Any object that exists in space, such as a planet, star or
the Moon.

2. It equals one year which is equal to 365.24 days. Diagram - Issac going around.

5. The Earth isn't flat because of many reasons. The first reason is if the earth was flat you would be able to drill right through it. Also there would be an edge where you could fall off of. 

8. So you can see further because of the angle of the earth.






