Student Name
Email Address

Monday, May 25, 2021

Aureole Studios 

Dear Hiring Committee, 

	I am writing to express interest in a job at your art studio. I am applying for the job of children’s art instructor, which I came across on indeed.com. It immediately piqued my interest. I am currently a grade 10 high school student at Peoples Christian Academy in Markham, Ontario. I saw on your website that you're a cultural and creative team that brings together leading artists and students alike with your mission being to use the latest ideas, technologies and methods to help your students achieve their dreams. I resonate strongly with this mission statement as both a creative and hopeful person. I was impressed by the sheer number of applications to reputable art universities your studio has helped students achieve. I would love to work for your company so I could help a new generation of dreamers learn, play and create. 

	I believe I would be a good fit for your company. I have experience teaching and leading groups of children. I’ve taken care of them for a long time and many have commented how much fun they have. Their parents trust me to watch over them and help them with their studies. I also have an artistic background. I’ve been taking art classes for 11 years. I know how to draw, paint, sketch and I am competent in other mediums. In addition, I know the fundamentals of art theory. I’m responsible and follow instructions well. Over the summer, I had a job co-leading a group of 7 children. I co-led them in arts and crafts as well as pre-planned lessons. The kids all said they enjoyed it and had a lot of fun. I show exemplary organizational skills in my day to day life that will transfer easily to a job like this. I am also patient and kind, especially around children who might need a little extra help. I’m creative and believe I can help your students have a fun experience while learning valuable knowledge about artistic fundamentals. 

	Thank you for considering me for this position. I believe I’d be a good fit for your company not just because of the skills and experience I possess, but because I believe I share the same spirit, attitude and love of art your company values. I welcome a meeting to further discuss my interests and abilities. 

Respectfully yours,
Student Name





