Psychologists’ Theory and Experiment

Plato: Psyche was the essence of the person, an  lzd it decides how a person behaves
Psyche is balance of logistikon (reason), epithumetikon (desire), and thumoeides (emotion)

Aristotle: Empirical approach, in order to study the mind, we have to possess observations and reasons to gather more information about the mind. Aristotle uses observation and reason to study the mind rather than pure logic


Rene Descartes: Cartesian dualism is a belief that the mind and body are NOT connected, body is material, mind is immaterial

Wilhelm Wundt: Opened first experimental laboratory in 1879, established psychology as an academic discipline, first to call himself a “psychologist, used scientific method to study mind


Psychodynamics

Sigmund Freud: Founder of psychoanalysis and introduced ideas such as consciousness, unconsciousness, id, ego, superego, dream interpretation, and psychosexual development

Carl Jung: Freud’s student, founded analytical psychology, based on the idea that balancing a person’s psyche would allow the person to reach their full potential

Karen Horney: a neo-Freudian, founded feminine psychology which deals with issues unique to females, and made contributions to the study of neurotic disorders

Behaviourism

Ivan Pavlov: A Nobel Prize-winning Russian scientist who started his career studying the digestive system. He is known for classical conditioning.

B.F. skinner: He is considered to have developed true behaviorism because he was concerned with only observable behaviors, not the mental processes behind them. He is known for his research involving rewards and punishment to influence behavior, known as operant conditioning.

Humanism

Abraham Maslow: one of the founders of humanist psychology, interested in studying well instead of sick people, developed hierarchy of needs

Victor Frankl: A holocaust and concentration camp survivor who developed his theories from his experiences in Auschwitz, developed Logotherapy

Carl Rogers: One of the founders of humanist psychology, developed client-centered therapy, nominated for a Nobel Prize for his work


Cognitive psychology

Albert bandura: Canadian, he was part of the “cognitive revolution” of psychologists moving away from purely behaviorist thought. He is known for social-cognitive theory. Known for the bobo doll experiment.

Elizabeth Loftus: Studying false memories and the flexibility and reliability of repressed memories for the past 30 years. Known for the lost in the mall experiment 

Developmental Psychology

Jean Piaget: French psychologist who was highly influential in developmental psychology and cognitive psychology. Created the stages of cognitive development

Erik Erikson: A neo-Freudian who believed that humans continue to develop over their lifetime rather than just in childhood, and that development depends on society and not just personal experiences. Developed the 8 stages of psychosocial development


Theories of attachment

John Bowlby: A british psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, notable for his interest in child development and his pioneering work in attachment theory. Bowlby believed that the earliest bonds formed by children with their caregivers have a tremendous impact that continues throughout life.

Harry Harlow: An American psychologist best known for his experiments on rhesus monkeys which demonstrated the importance of caregiving to social and cognitive development. Known for the surrogate mother experiment.

Mary Ainsworth: An American psychologist who was a student of John Bowlby. Ainsworth’s study of child development laid the groundwork for our understanding of mother-infant separation and how it influences interactions later in life. She devised the Strange Situation Experiment.