












  The Resurrection of Jesus Christ
















Misia Lui
Mr. Mcdonald
December 1, 2022
REL2O A

	
This essay was written to prove that the resurrection of Jesus Christ actually happened and was historically accurate. 
There are many reasons as to why the resurrection of Jesus is historically correct and actually took place. The tomb stone in which Jesus’ body was laid after he was crucified, which was sealed shut and heavily guarded 24/7, was all of a sudden left unattended and stone rolled out with the body gone. There are also multiple people who sighted Jesus after his initial death. Christians’ belief on the truth of the resurrection of Jesus is very important, as it determines the entire background of the doctrine.
The first important detail to point out to prove Christ’s resurrection was the fact that the large stone in front of the tomb which possessed Jesus’ body was completely moved away. That Sunday morning, those who came across the tombstone realized that the gigantic stone had been removed, and Jesus’ body gone. Not only was the stone moved, but it was placed in an unusually far place away from the actual tombstone, indicating that someone must’ve picked it up. On the day Jesus was crucified and laid inside the tomb, Roman guards were specifically ordered to guard the tombstone under all circumstances 24/7. If someone had actually moved the stone, possibly the disciples, how did they manage to carry such a gigantic mass stone without a sound and get past the guards stationed there? Under no human circumstances would anyone be able to move the stone, let alone have no one see Jesus’ disappearance later on. In William Lane Craig’s book: On Guard, it mentions how “in that case, the tomb must have been empty when the disciples began to preach that Jesus was risen.” This is a solid statement and how it can prove that the tomb was empty upon inspection, leading to the belief of his resurrection. If the body remained inside the tomb while the disciples came to check, then why bother preaching to everyone about a resurrection if the body was laid right before them? Especially since the people of Jerusalem as well as the witnesses of His crucifixion all believe and saw first hand Jesus’ body being laid inside the tomb, they would think that the disciples were going mad and wouldn’t believe them for a second. The Jewish authorities are very much set on eliminating all beliefs of Christianity, so if the disciples made a ruckus about Jesus’ resurrection, they would definitely check the tomb even if the claim was rather bizarre.  
This connects to the second main concern. What exactly happened to the Roman Guards on the night the stone was removed and why weren’t they present in the morning? They fled. This contradicts every duty to be a Roman Guard, as the consequences of rebelling the rules are very potentially dire. Justin specifies in Digest #49 that if the Roman guards were to disobey the orders of their superior military generals,  it’s possible for them to receive a death penalty. Having thought of the guards’ perspectives, if their lives could potentially end due to the inability to carry out duties, paying extremely close attention to nearby surroundings must’ve been one of the top things the guards would’ve  been doing. Despite this, not only did the Roman guards being unable to sense anything happening, they also disappeared by morning. Though it is unclear how the Roman guards had heard or seen the resurrection, it was clear that they had fled from their post due to something they had seen and had been described as looking like ‘dead men’ (Matt. 28.11-15). 
Above all of this, the proof of Jesus’ appearances after the resurrection were confirmed by the surrounding public at the time. Back then, women were seen as defective and on a much lower power status than men. But despite that, the Bible recorded all three first witnesses as women, they did not list any of the disciples as first witnesses for the sake of following that stereotype, but they chose women because it was the whole truth. As said in Mar.16.1-11, the first person Jesus appeared himself to was none other than Mary Magdalene, and then later to the disciples. Later on, there were over 500 witnesses who saw Jesus after the crucifixion, and Paul specified that at the time of questioning, all 500 were still alive, therefore would be free to be questioned (1 Cor.15.3–7). He assured them that every one of those 500 would have a first hand testimony on the siting of Jesus. Another key aspect was that Jesus didn’t just appear towards those who he was familiar with, as well as the basic public, but he also showed himself in front of many non-believers and those who didn’t like Him. Paul, previously known as Saul, would be one of those people; he was never a follower of Christ before the crucifixion, in fact he despised the Christian faith and would harm those who believed. Everyone knew him as that. Even despite this, Paul admitted wholeheartedly that Jesus did in fact show in front of him. Later on, he devotes his life to Christianity and continues to spread the gospel and his experience of his resurrection. 
The facts above are what prove that Jesus did in fact get resurrected, and how this event alone has affected the Christian faith for everything we believe in. Knowing how the stone covering Jesus’ tombstone was removed and the disappearance of His body affected the guards which led to them fleeing their post, as well as the over 500 witnesses witnessing Jesus’ appearance, it is safe to say that these events were historically accurate and actually did happen. 








Cites:
“Bible Gateway Passage: Mark 16 - New International Version.” Bible Gateway, https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mar.16.1-11&version=ESV
“1 Corinthians 15:3-7 ESV Bible Gateway.” 1 Corinthians 15:3–7 ESV - - Bible Gateway https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=1%2BCorinthians%2B15%3A3%E2%80%937&amp;version=ESV. 
Craig, William Lane. On Guard. Colorado Springs, Co, David C Cook, 2010.
GotQuestions.org. “Who Was Saul.” GotQuestions.org, 5 Nov. 2014, https://www.gotquestions.org/Saul-of-Tarsus.html. 
Copan, Paul. True for You, but Not for Me: Deflating the Slogans That Leave Christians Speechless. Bethany House Publishers, 1998. 






