PCA POETRY SLAM

Welcome to PCA’s ANNUAL Poetry SLam! 
ENG3U scholars will be putting together a poetry slam that will consist of pre-recorded videos of original poems, music, & artwork in the style of SPOKEN WORD POETRY. Students have the option of working SOLO or in CREWS (no more than 3 people), but all work will be judged individually (AOL). Students working together should have their own stanzas to perform.  

Poets may choose any theme from Previous units
Themes include (but are not limited to):
Justice, injustice, race, gender, poverty, power, faith, peace, hope, love, bridges, food, walls, childhood, connection, dreams, hypocrisy, voice, Family,  Resilience, Joy, and so on.

Poets must utilize structure & devices characteristic of Spoken Word Poetry.
Narrative features: plot, characterization, dialogue, etc.
Dramatic Features: soliloquy/Monologue, clear speaker, blocking, etc.
Lyrical Features: use of emotion, refrain/repetition, heavy use of symbolism/metaphor/imagery
Genre features: allusion, rhythm, music/beat, etc.

Poets may choose Performance Type:
Performance (gestures, facial expressions, volume, Emotion, blocking, clothing, etc.)
Musical/song (includes perf. aspects)
Hip Hop/slam/battle  (gestures, facial expression, blocking, clothing, etc.)
Art (Visual art) + recorded performance (Vocal expression, volume, pace)

LENGTH:
Poems should be around the length of those studied through our previous reading crews presentations (1-2 pages)
Videos should be no longer than 3 minutes* 
*Except for groups: Will depend on the number of people.
Curriculum Expectations:
W2.1: Write for different purposes and audiences using a variety of informational, literary, and graphic forms.
W3.6: Use a variety of presentation features, including print & Script, fonts, graphics, and layout, to improve the clarity and coherence of their written work and to heighten its appeal for their audience. 
OC2.1: Communicate orally for several different purposes, using language appropriate for the intended audience.
OC2.3: Communicate in a clear, coherent manner appropriate to the purpose, subject matter, and intended audience.
OC2.7: Use several different audio-visual aids to support and enhance oral presentations.


Learning GoalS
SALT… write according to purpose and audience using a variety of forms and text features.
SALT… use a variety of presentation techniques to effectively engage an audience and communicate a clear message.
Success criteria (Co-created) (Check Rubric)
SWBAT… write and perform an original spoken word piece for an audience of their peers around a course theme of their choice.