Characteristics of Poetry
Why write or read poetry?
Significance:  Poets try to write about meaningful experience in a way that inspires a meaningful experience in the reader. For instance, poets write poems about what they feel strongly.  As readers, we can then ask ourselves, what meaningful experience is represented here? And then, what is my reaction to the poem and what parts of the poem inspire that reaction? Poets also write about ideas they think are important. As readers we can identify the main idea by asking ourselves what does the author want me to think or to believe?  Literature does not only entertain, it also provides insight, an accurate and deep understanding of someone or something. Poetry and all literature might further a reader’s ‘accurate and deep understanding’ of individual people’s experience (like love, loneliness, joy, despair, etc.).  It might also provide insight into social or group experience (like, racism, sexism, homophobia, violence, materialism, etc.).

Ballad of Birmingham 
by Dudley Randall

“Mother dear, may I go downtown 
Instead of out to play, 
And march the streets of Birmingham 
In a Freedom March today?” 

“No, baby, no, you may not go, 
For the dogs are fierce and wild, 
And clubs and hoses, guns and jails 
Aren’t good for a little child.” 

“But, mother, I won’t be alone. 
Other children will go with me, 
And march the streets of Birmingham 
To make our country free.” 

“No, baby, no, you may not go, 
For I fear those guns will fire. 
But you may go to church instead 
And sing in the children’s choir.” 



She has combed and brushed her night-dark hair, 
And bathed rose petal sweet, 
And drawn white gloves on her small brown hands, 
And white shoes on her feet. 

The mother smiled to know her child 
Was in the sacred place, 
But that smile was the last smile 
To come upon her face. 

For when she heard the explosion, 
Her eyes grew wet and wild. 
She raced through the streets of Birmingham 
Calling for her child. 

She clawed through bits of glass and brick, 
Then lifted out a shoe. 
“O, here’s the shoe my baby wore, 
But, baby, where are you?”

Post-Reading Questions

What meaningful experiences are represented in the poem?
Which part (or parts) of the poem evoked the strongest reaction (positive or negative) in you? Why?
What aspects of individual people’s experience (i.e. love, loneliness, joy, despair) and/or what aspects of social or group experience (racism, sexism, homophobia, violence, materialism) does the poem address?
Identify the significance of the poem by naming the theme or main idea and give a supporting detail. 
Prewriting. List five things that are personally significant to you. List three things that are socially significant to you. 

Characteristics of Poetry
Are some ways of writing more effective when one is trying to write about a meaningful experience in a way that inspires a meaningful experience in the reader?

Comparative Language is central to poetry. Poets believe that using comparative language is a powerful way to represent a meaningful experience and to inspire insight and emotion in the reader.  In essence, poets believe that comparing is more effective than explaining.  Comparative language is a way of understanding and experiencing one thing in terms of another.  It includes symbol, metaphor, simile, personification, and allusion.
A symbol is an object, animate (alive) or inanimate (not alive), which represents or stands for something else.  Scales represent justice. A dove represents peace. A lion represents strength and courage. 

A metaphor is a comparison between unlike things.
	“All the world is a stage,
  And all the men and women merely players”
					-Shakespeare
The world is compared to a theatre stage and people are compared to actors
A simile is a direct comparison between two unlike things introduced by like or as.
				“My love is like a red, red rose.”
					-Robert Burns

A personification is a metaphor or simile that gives human characteristics to inanimate objects, animals, or abstract ideas. 

 “The stars danced playfully in the moonlit sky.”
Or 
“The run down house appeared depressed.”
An allusion is a reference to another well-known work or event (like to Shakespeare, mythology, the Bible, history, or even pop culture). 

"The girl's love of sweets was her Achilles’ heel," 
This allusion references the warrior in Greek mythology, Achilles, who could only be harmed if something hit his heel because he was dipped in magic water as baby when his mother held him by a heel. Achilles' only weakness is his heel, so an Achilles’ heel reference means a downfall or weakness, in this example a weakness for sweets.

 Barren means ugly or something that's not apparently pleasing

A broken winged bird and dreams are compared in this stanza, its a metaphor.
Dreams are supposed to be big and be creative so it can fly high IDK WHAT IM SAYING anyway broken winged bird and broken dreams are similar because well, they’re broken.

Life is like an empty boring field and dreams leaving are compared. When dreams go, its like not having a goal in life therefore its like life is empty and boring. When dreams go Life is like an empty field frozen with snow like your life is cold and empty.

I have no emotions. Im just built like that. Life is like a broken- winged bird That cannot fly evoked the strongest emotions because its like if your dream dies then you also die.

It addresses despair mostly, this poem gives a sad vibe

It addresses group experience because in one of the stanzas, Langston Hughes says to hold onto dreams and if it dies, then you have no will to go on.

The main theme is  holding onto your dreams, don’t let anyone destroy or break your dreams. Your dreams are more valuable than you think.

That person that shall not be named thats personally significant to me, is like video games, I think about both all day and I just want to play league all day, i think im addicted to league i need help anyway, im always happy when I see that person and im always happy when I play league (thats a lie) I don’t regret meeting that person at all and I don’t regret being introduced to league (thats also a lie)


Characteristics of Poetry
2.Comparative Language is central to poetry. Poets believe that using comparative language is a powerful way to represent a meaningful experience and to inspire insight and emotion in the reader.  In essence, poets believe that comparing is more effective than explaining.  A comparison is a way of understanding and experiencing one thing in terms of another.  Comparative language includes symbols,  metaphor, simile, personification, and allusion.

      Dreams
by Langston Hughes

Hold fast to dreams
For if dreams die
Life is a broken-winged bird
That cannot fly.

Hold fast to dreams
For when dreams go
Life is a barren field
Frozen with snow.
Post-reading Questions:
Define barren.
	Barren, in this case meaning bleak and lifeless. 
In the first stanza what two things are compared? What kind of comparison is it? Imagine and list four ways these two things are similar.
The two things compared are life and a broken winged bird, if you let go of dreams. This can be related to each other because: 
1- Dreams are usually the fundamental ground for a will to live. When we let go of dreams and let them “die”, it’s like the bird has hit something and broken its wing; and because of that it cannot fly anymore, like how we have no will to go on anymore. 
2-  Life without dreams would be meaningless; broken wings no way to fly. 
3- As a bird with a broken wing, we are but a shell with no hopes of the future. 
4- Life is a broken winged bird, can basically be summarized to meaning that our dreams, our lives itself are very delicate. Any harm towards it could potentially break. We need to protect our dreams. 
In the second stanza what two things are compared? What kind of comparison is it? Imagine and list four ways these two things are similar.
The two that are compared are life and the barren field, if you let go of dreams. This can be related to each other because: 
1- When dreams are broken, most of the time your life seems absolutely meaningless, no motivation, nothing to look forward to. This can be compared to the barren field, lifeless and completely empty. 
2- Life is like a barren field. Unless you find something that stands out from the dead field, only then will you go chase it. If you don’t see anything worthwhile, what’s the point of moving anywhere? Just like you are frozen with snow. 
3- Even if dreams aren’t dead, if it lacks any purpose, they stand still, nowhere to go if there’s no purpose, frozen in snow in the barren field. 
4- With no motivation, a dream will just remain there without it actually getting put into action. Over time that dream fades, gets frozen, unable to move, no longer having any meaning. 
Which part (or parts) of the poem evoked the strongest reaction (positive or negative) in you? Why?
The second stanza. I never really thought about it before, but I have a lot of dreams that were never actually pursued. Now I realize because of this it has become meaningless to me. They were once important to me, but because I had no motivation to make it happen, I lost interest in it. Those dreams are now just like the barren field. 
What aspects of individual people’s experience (i.e. love, loneliness, joy, despair) and/or what aspects of social or group experience (racism, sexism, homophobia, violence, materialism) does the poem address? Explain. 
The poem addresses all emotions. Positive ones, and possibly due to social or group experiences, do they become negative emotions. We all now, or before, had dreams. They were positive things in our lives, a sign for us to have something to look forward and reach for. But due to social or group experiences, it can change our perspectives. As we grow older we start changing our minds on many things, as well as subconsciously giving up on dreams. Whether its because of a negative experience that leaves us sad, lonely, angry, or any of that, dreams that once had meaning to us might break in seconds. 
Langston Hughes was African American, and he wrote this poem before the Civil Rights movement in the United States resulted in legalizing equal rights for African Americans. Now what aspects of social or group experience (racism, sexism, homophobia, violence, materialism) does the poem address? Explain. 
Identify the significance of the poem by naming the theme or main idea and give a supporting detail.
Prewriting. Previously, you created a list of five items of personal significance and three of social significance. Now choose two items from those lists and for each create a comparison. (i.e. Friends are like a mountain). Choose something like an object (ship), geographical feature (sea), or animal (bear). Then for each, create a list of three ways that the two are similar. (i.e. Friends are like a mountain because….)
Characteristics of Poetry
Are some ways of writing more effective when one is trying to write about a meaningful experience in a way that inspires a meaningful experience in the reader?
3.Poets use imagery. Imagery is language that appeals to the senses (sight, hearing, touch, taste, smell). Poets believe that using imagery is a powerful way to represent a meaningful experience and to inspire insight and emotion in the reader.  In essence, poets believe that it is more powerful to show an experience by including specific description that appeals to the senses than to tell about it in ways that do not.. 

The Road Not Taken  
 By Robert Frost

Two roads diverged in a yellow wood,
And sorry I could not travel both
And be one traveler, long I stood
And looked down one as far as I could
To where it bent in the undergrowth;

Then took the other, as just as fair,
And having perhaps the better claim
Because it was grassy and wanted wear,
Though as for that the passing there
Had worn them really about the same,

And both that morning equally lay
In leaves no step had trodden black.
Oh, I marked the first for another day!
Yet knowing how way leads on to way
I doubted if I should ever come back.

I shall be telling this with a sigh
Somewhere ages and ages hence:
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I,
I took the one less traveled by,
And that has made all the difference. 


Post-Reading Questions:
Define diverged and trodden. 
Describe what happens in this poem. What choice does the narrator make and why?
Does the narrator ever expect to return to this choice?  Why?
Explain these lines: “Though as for that the passing there/ Had worn them really about the same.”
Identify 2 lines or phrases that use imagery and the sense to which they appeal. Describe what each allows you to imagine.
Identify 2 comparisons and the lines of the poem that use them.
Why does the narrator sigh?
 The poet chose to call this poem “The Road Not Taken” rather than “The Road Less Travelled.” How does this choice affect the poem’s meaning?
What meaningful experiences are represented in the poem?
Which part (or parts) of the poem evoked the strongest reaction (positive or negative) in you? Why?
Identify the significance of the poem by naming the theme or main idea and give a supporting detail. 
Prewriting. Previously, you chose two symbols to represent two items you value. Now for each of those symbols, create five descriptions that appeal to the senses. Try to appeal to as many of the senses as possible. (i.e. The mountain top glowed orange in the setting sun.)

Characteristics of Poetry
Are some ways of writing more effective when one is trying to write about a meaningful experience in a way that inspires a meaningful experience in the reader?
4.Language Use: Poets believe that using language well is a powerful way to write about a meaningful experience and to inspire insight and emotion in the reader.  In essence, poets believe that saying a thing well is more effective than saying it less well.  Poets strive to create powerful language. They seek to use ‘good words’ and to create ‘good phrases.’  To do so they choose words that are precise and unique, and they create words and phrases that ‘sound good.’  To create phrases that sound good, they use language devices like alliteration, assonance, consonance, rhyme, and rhythm.
Language Devices:
Alliteration is the repetition of the sound at the beginning of three or more neighbouring words.
		“And wake to the farm forever fled” - Dylan Thomas

Assonance is the repetition of similar vowel sounds in three or more neighbouring words.
		“In silence deep the legions stream,” - Herman Melville

Consonance is the repetition of similar consonant sounds in three or more neighbouring words.
		“A springful of larks in a rolling/Cloud” - Dylan Thomas

Rhyme is the similarity of sounds between the endings of words (as in sun and run above).

Rhythm is the flow of the poem as created by the number of syllables per line and the alternating 
		of stressed and unstressed syllables. 
Characteristics of Poetry
4.Language Use: Poets strive to create powerful language. They seek to use ‘good words’ and to create ‘good phrases.’ To do so they use poetic devices like alliteration, assonance, consonance, onomatopoeia, euphony, cacophony, rhyme, and rhythm.

Richard Cory 
by Edwin Arlington Robinson

Whenever Richard Cory went down town, 
We people on the pavement looked at him: 
He was a gentleman from sole to crown, 
Clean-favoured and imperially slim. 

And he was always quietly arrayed, 
And he was always human when he talked; 
But still he fluttered pulses when he said, 
"Good Morning!" and he glittered when he walked. 

And he was rich, yes, richer than a king, 
And admirably schooled in every grace: 
In fine -- we thought that he was everything 
To make us wish that we were in his place. 

So on we worked and waited for the light, 
And went without the meat and cursed the bread, 
And Richard Cory, one calm summer night, 
Went home and put a bullet in his head.
Post-reading Questions
What happens in this poem? Why is Richard Cory’s last action unexpected?
Define: imperially, arrayed, grace. 
Identify 3 poetic devices like alliteration, assonance, consonance, rhyme, and rhythm. 
Identify 2 lines or phrases that use imagery and the sense to which they appeal. Describe what each allows you to imagine.
Identify 1 line of the poem that uses comparative language. State what kind of comparison it is. Then state what is being compared (A=B) and explain what the comparison means.
What meaningful experiences are represented in the poem?
Which part (or parts) of the poem evoked the strongest reaction (positive or negative) in you? Why?
Identify the significance of the poem by naming the theme or main idea and give a supporting detail. 
Characteristics of Poetry
Are some ways of writing more effective when one is trying to write about a meaningful experience in a way that inspires a meaningful experience in the reader?
5.Line Breaks. Poets believe that the way the words are arranged on the paper is an effective way to write about a meaningful experience and to inspire insight and emotion in the reader.   For poets, line breaks are intentional and contribute to the meaning and effect of the poem. 

Here are three reasons that poets break a line: a) it contains a complete thought or image, b) to emphasize a good or important word by placing it at the beginning or end of a line, c) the placement of the word on the page reflects the meaning
i.e. the 
		balloon 
				descended 

Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening
by Robert Frost

Whose woods these are I think I know.
His house is in the village though;
He will not see me stopping here
To watch his woods fill up with snow.

My little horse must think it queer
To stop without a farmhouse near
Between the woods and frozen lake
The darkest evening of the year.

He gives his harness bells a shake
To ask if there is some mistake.
The only other sound's the sweep
Of easy wind and downy flake.

The woods are lovely, dark and deep.
But I have promises to keep,
And miles to go before I sleep,
And miles to go before I sleep.







Post-Reading Questions:
Define queer.
What happens in this poem?
An inference is a conclusion reached on the basis of evidence and reasoning. Make an inference about why the narrator stops.
Why does he continue? Why might the last line be repeated? (For instance, how might it convey a different emotion the second time?)
Analyze the first line break of the poem. Explain why it does or does not follow each of the three line break conventions. 
Identify 2 poetic devices like alliteration, assonance, consonance, rhyme, and rhythm.
Identify 2 lines or phrases that use imagery and the sense to which they appeal. Describe what each allows you to imagine.
Identify 1 line of the poem that uses comparative language. State what kind of comparison it is. Then state what is being compared (A=B) and explain what the comparison means.
What meaningful experiences are represented in the poem?
Which part (or parts) of the poem evoked the strongest reaction (positive or negative) in you? Why?
Identify the significance of the poem by naming the theme or main idea and give a supporting detail. 
Characteristics of Poetry
Are some ways of writing more effective when one is trying to write about a meaningful experience in a way that inspires a meaningful experience in the reader?

Originality: Poets believe that saying something original is an effective way to write about a meaningful experience and to inspire insight and emotion in the reader.  In essence, poets believe that being creative or unique is more effective than being clichéd (overly familiar or commonplace). Poets attempt to say things in a way that has not been said before. 

JABBERWOCKY
 by Lewis Carroll
`Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
  Did gyre and gimble in the wabe:
All mimsy were the borogoves,
  And the mome raths outgrabe.

"Beware the Jabberwock, my son!
  The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!
Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun
  The frumious Bandersnatch!"

He took his vorpal sword in hand:
  Long time the manxome foe he sought --
So rested he by the Tumtum tree,
  And stood awhile in thought.

And, as in uffish thought he stood,
  The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame,
Came whiffling through the tulgey wood,
  And burbled as it came!

One, two! One, two! And through and through
  The vorpal blade went snicker-snack!
He left it dead, and with its head
  He went galumphing back.

"And, has thou slain the Jabberwock?
  Come to my arms, my beamish boy!
O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!'
  He chortled in his joy.

`Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
  Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
All mimsy were the borogoves,
  And the mome raths outgrabe
Post-Reading Questions

Who speaks the words in quotations marks?
What happens in this poem? 
The poem requires us to make inferences about the meaning of words the author has made up. Make an inference about the definition of brillig, slithy, vorpal, and frabjous.
Identify 3 poetic devices like alliteration, assonance, consonance, rhyme, and rhythm.
Identify 2 lines or phrases that use imagery and the sense to which they appeal. Describe what each allows you to imagine.
Analyze one line break in the poem. Explain why it does or does not follow each of the three line break conventions. 
The poem seems to be based on a well-known style of story, which would make it a kind of allusion. 
What well known kind of story provides the basis for this poem? 
How might the entire poem be a metaphor?
In what ways is the poem creative?
What meaningful experiences are represented in the poem?
Which part (or parts) of the poem evoked the strongest reaction (positive or negative) in you? Why?
Identify the significance of the poem by naming the theme or main idea and give a supporting detail. 

Nothing Gold Can Stay
by Robert Frost

Nature's first green is gold
Her hardest hue to hold.
Her early leaf's a flower;
But only so an hour.
Then leaf subsides to leaf.
So Eden sank to grief,
So dawn goes down to day.
Nothing gold can stay.



Post-Reading Questions
Identify 2 poetic devices like alliteration, assonance, consonance, rhyme, and rhythm.
Identify 2 lines or phrases that use imagery and the sense to which they appeal. Describe what each allows you to imagine.
Analyze one line break in the poem. Explain why it does or does not follow each of the three line break conventions. 
Identify 2 lines of the poem that use comparative language. For each, state what kind of comparison it is. Then state what is being compared (A=B) and explain what the comparison means.
Discuss ways in which this poem is original or creative.
What meaningful experiences are represented in the poem?
Which part (or parts) of the poem evoked the strongest reaction (positive or negative) in you? Why?
Identify the significance of the poem by naming the theme or main idea and give a supporting detail.

Poetry Booklet A Summative Assignment
Read the poem and then answer the following questions using complete sentences, paragraphs and supporting details from the poem. Answers will be handed in and marked. Include a title page that states your name, teacher’s name, class name (ENG1D), and the date due. Type or write in blue or black ink. Double-space (leave a line between each line of text). A 4-6 mark question should be at least 1 paragraph of 5-8 sentences. A 10 mark question should be at least 2 paragraphs of 5-8 sentences. Each answer should include supporting details from the poem. 
To the Friend I Broke Up With  
by Lynne Ferguson

Life is a jigsaw puzzle
And people are the little pieces --
All different colors
And all different shapes and sizes.
Sometimes you pick up a piece 
And match it with another,
And the colors blend perfectly,
And they fit into each other.
But in our case,
The colors clashed,
And the jagged little edges 
Just wouldn’t fit together,
No matter how hard we push them.
I guess we could have changed.
But isn’t it against the rules
To cut up the pieces
so that they fit together

Language Use: Identify 3 examples of alliteration, assonance, consonance, rhyme, or rhythm. Give the line of the poem, the language device and clearly identify how the language device is present in the line. (i.e. the line is an example of alliteration because of the repetition of the letter l at the beginning of the words long, languid, and labour). (6 marks –k-u/app/t-i/com) 
Imagery: Identify 2 lines or phrases that use imagery and the sense to which they appeal. Describe what each allows you to imagine.  (10 marks–k-u/app/t-i/com)
Line Breaks: Analyze one line break in the poem. Explain why it does or does not follow each of the three line break conventions.  (4 marks–k-u/app/t-i/com)
Comparative Language: Identify 2 lines of the poem that use comparative language. For each, state what kind of comparison it is. Then state what is being compared (A=B) and explain what the comparison means. (10 marks–k-u/app/t-i/com)
Originality:  Discuss ways in which this poem is original or creative. - Explain why or how this example is creative. For instance, compare the poem to poems previously studied.  (5 marks–k-u/app/t-i/com)
What is the theme or main idea of the poem?  Support your answer with specific details from the text. (10 marks–k-u/app/t-i/com)
Personal Response: what are your reactions, thoughts, and/or feelings about the poem? (10 marks–k-u/app/t-i/com)
Poetry Booklet Summative Assignment 
Creative Writing Option

Write one original poem that includes the six characteristics of poetry. The poem must be at least 50 words long and must be an original creation for this project. 
 Creative Writing: Poetry (t/i, k/u, app, comm)

Communication

Comments:											/70

