
Biology

Plants and Animal Cells (Pg textbook pages 10-19, answer questions at end of handout)
													
The Cell Theory:
All living things are made up of one or more cells and their products
The cell is the simplest unit that can carry out all life processes
All cells come from other cells, they do not come from non-living matter

All living things are made up of cells, but some very simple and some very complex
Prokaryote: always single celled organisms that do not contain a nucleus or other membrane-bound organelles (e.g. E. Coli)
Eukaryotes: a cell that contains a nucleus and other organelles, each surrounded by a thin membrane (Includes all protists, fungi, animals, and plants).
Both contain genetic information


Cell Division & The Cell Cycle

What is Cell Division?
The process by which a parent cell gives to two daughter cells
Involves the division of the nucleus (nuclear division) and cytokinesis (division of the cytoplasm)

Why do Cells Need to Divide?
Allows organisms to reproduce, repair damage, and grow

Reproduction

Asexual Reproduction
Parent cell division results in two new organisms
Each new cell must (ideally) have a complete set of genes
Involves only one parent
Can either produce two equal cells (symmetric cell division) or two unequal cells (asymmetric cell division)
Asymmetrical division can lead to several issues

Sexual Reproduction
A cell from one parent joins with a cell from another parent
Gametes: these cells contain only half of the DNA usually found in a body cell
When two gametes combine, the offspring inherits characteristics from both parents 
Repair
Every day, your body sheds millions of dead skin cells. Replaced by new ones
Your body replaces each red blood cell every 120 days 
If you break a bone, cells divide to heal the bone 
As cells die, are damaged, wear out or are lost, new cells must replace them 
All organisms need to repair themselves to stay alive

Growth
One of the basic processes of all life is GROWTH. All cells grow, but they eventually reach a size limit.
We know that the larger the volume the greater number of reactions that can occur in cytoplasm
All nutrients required for metabolism can only enter the cell through its membrane (dependent on surface area).
As surface area increases, so does the cells’ ability to transport materials through its membrane. 

Growth: Diffusion & Osmosis

Chemicals used cells enter the cell and across the membrane by the process called diffusion
From area of high concentration to an area of low concentration
Water enters and leaves cells by a process called osmosis
Water always moves toward their the solution more concentrate
Diffusion and osmosis take time. If a cell gets too large, chemicals and water cannot move fast enough

Growth
Therefore, a cell with a certain volume needs an appropriate surface area to acth it
As a cell grows the surface area to volume ratio decreases
At some point in cell growth this ratio becomes so small that its surface area is too small to supply its raw materials to its volume
The cell must either divide or die
Therefore, as organisms grow the number of cells in that organism must increase


Cell Physiology: Transport and energy

Metabolism: the sum of all the processes a cell may use to store or obtain energy or utilise structural or functional materials
Homeostasis: the tendency of living organisms to maintain a stable internal environment even though conditions in the external environment may vary

Types of Transport in the cell
Passive Transport: the natural movement of molecules across a cell membrane; no energy from the cell is required (eg: diffusion, osmosis)
Diffusion: the movement of gas or liquid molecules from a region of high concentration to a region of low concentration
Diffusion occurs only until a system reaches equilibrium (no net movement: molecules are always in motion, but don’t do anything) 
Many molecules can be moving by diffusion at the same time

Concentration Gradient
The difference in concentration between a region of greater (high) concentration and a region of lesser (low) concentration
Affects the rate of diffusion as does temperature

Membrane Permeability
Cell membranes regulate the type and the amount of substances that are able to enter or exit a cell
Permeability: the degree to which molecules can move freely across a membrane is determined by the properties of the cell membrane and the size and characteristics of the molecules involved


		


The Cell Cycle: Mitosis & Cell Division

Cell Division
All cells divide, but some vary in how long it takes 
Some bacteria can divide in 20 minutes
Some body cells take 30 hours
Some cells stop dividing completely – like adult nerve cells

The Cell Cycle
Cytokinesis → Cycle Begins → Cell Grows → Cell receives instructions regarding division → DNA replicates → Cell prepares to divide → Mitosis
As eukaryotic cells grow and divide, they move through different stages
These stages are: Interphase, Mitosis, Cytokinesis

Interphase: Getting Ready for Mitosis
The cell spends most of its time in interphase
During interphase the cell carries out all life activities except for cell division
When the cell prepares for division in interphase, the DNA (every chromosome) is duplicated and more organelles are formed. This is called DNA replication
Until the cell is ready to divide chromosomes are long and loose (rather than condensed and organised)
DNA replication is usually very precise and errors are fixed by ‘proofreading’ and repair proteins
When cells are not actively dividing they are doing the jobs they are designed to do
Ex. a muscle cell creates proteins that allow muscles to contract
The cell also grow and prepares for mitosis by replicating its DNA and organelles

Act 1: Mitosis
Mitosis was discovered by German scientist Walther Flemming
Mitosis is greek word for “thread” (due to the jumble of chromatin in the nucleus)
Mitosis has four stages: Prophase, Metaphase, Anaphase, Telophase
Mitosis occur throughout your entire body over your entire life around 10,000000,000,000,000 (quadrillion) times

Prophase
Pro is latin for ‘before’
Long strands of DNA condense into chromosomes
Each chromosome is made up of two identical copies of DNA (chromatid)
Held together by a centromere
The nuclear membrane breaks down
Centrosome (part of the cytoskeleton) begin moving to opposite ends of the cell



Metaphase
Meta is Latin for ‘middle’
Chromosomes line up in the middle of the cell
Centrosomes reach the opposite ends of the cell
Spindle fibres appear from the centrioles and attach to the centromeres
Anaphase
Ana is Latin for ‘back’
Up to this point the spindle fibres are stretched like elastic bands
They being pulling chromatids apart to opposite ends of the cell
Once the chromatids separate they are considered chromosomes again
Exactly how the chromatids align in the centre of the cell was only discovered in 2012 (complex process)

Telophase
Spindle fibres start to disappear
Nuclear membranes form around two new daughter nuclei
Nucleolus appears in each nucleus
Chromatids unwind to become long strands of DNA

The End of Mitosis
This marks the end of mitosis (i.e. the division of one nucleus into two identical ones)
Now the rest of the cell is ready to divide
Even though we learned the 4 stages of mitosis, the actual process is continuous – there are no breaks in between phases

Act 2: Cytokinesis
Final stage of cell division where the cytoplasm (organelles and cytosol) divides producing two identical daughter cells
Animal Cells: the cell membrane pinches to produce two cells
Plant Cells: a cell plate develops between the two nuclei and forms  cell wall
Cell division allows organisms (like you and me) to grow from a single cell into a multicellular foetus and then into a full sized human
During division, DNA replication ensures that all body cells have identical genes
However, different body cells have different structures and functions (they are specialised)
This occurs due to some genes being activated and others not … only 10% activated usually!

You Shall Not Pass!!
Cells are not always dividing – there are control mechanisms to make sure the cell doesn’t divide uncontrollably
There are four important cell cycle checkpoints. Cell division will not occur if: 
Signals from surrounding cells tell the cell not to divide
There are not enough nutrients for growth
DNA did not replicate (cell is repaired or destroyed)
DNA is damaged (cell is destroyed)
Leaving the Cell Cycle
Cells aren’t in the cell cycle forever
Cells leave the cycle to die
This can be due to damage beyond repair (i.e. exposure to chemicals or physical force)
Cells leave the cycle to commit ‘suicide’
Cell breaks down in an organised way, recycling its contents for use by other cells (i.e. DNA damage)

Human Embryo: An example of Cell ‘Suicide’
In some birds and animals the hands and feet of the embryo are solid at first
Separate fingers and toes are produced through the programmed death of the cells in between the digits


Mutations: Causes, Consequences, and Safeguards

A mutation is an alteration, or change, in the genetic code of an organism. A mutation can be either at the DNA level or at the Chromosomal level. A DNA mutation occurs when one or more set of bases(ATCG) do not match up. Examples include cancers, cystic fibrosis, albinism and progeria (a disease where people grow old very quickly, and typically die in their early teens). A chromosome mutation occurs when the number of chromosomes is different than the number that there should be. Humans should have 46 chromosomes (23 different pairs), but sometimes they have an extra chromosome or they are missing one. Examples include Down’s syndrome (an extra copy of C21) and Crie du Chat (missing part of C5).

Mutations can occur naturally, but they can also be caused by Mutagens. Mutagens can
be chemical or physical. Many of the chemicals that humans emit that are
responsible for GCC and environmental damage are also mutagens. Examples include
smog (low level ozone), smoke and dioxins. Physical mutagens include radiation from X-
rays and the sun. As the ozone layer is depleted, more solar radiation reaches the
earth’s surface. This has been correlated to increased levels of skin cancers.

Mutations can be of three types: neutral, beneficial or harmful. Neutral mutations may have no outward effect on the organism or their effects neither help nor harm the organism. An example would include a new hair colour. Beneficial mutations are mutations that would help the organism. An example would be a more efficient oxygen carrier molecule or a bacterium that develops antibiotic resistance. Harmful mutations are mutations that hurt the organism, such as cancers and cystic fibrosis.

The mutation type can also vary based on the environment in which an organism lives.
A neutral mutation may become harmful or beneficial in a different
environment or vice versa. An example of this is sickle cell anaemia. It can prevent malaria, a
dangerous parasite, but it can also result in a decreased ability to carry oxygen in the blood.
w
The cell has safeguards to prevent most mutations from getting out of control. As
cells move between the different stages of interphase, checks are performed to see if
the DNA is correct. Cells whose DNA is damaged are either repaired or destroyed.
Cells can be signalled to commit suicide in a process called apoptosis.

Cancer is a particularly pernicious mutation as it functions by preventing cell death and
allowing for uncontrolled division. Cancerous cells can separate from the tumour and
move throughout the body to grow in other locations.
Cancer & the Cell Cycle

Background Info
Abby has been having abdominal pain
She has gone to see an oncologist (a doctor who studies and treats cancer) Dr. Allen
An ultrasound has indicated a mass on her right ovary
She is preparing to have the mass and ovary removed surgically

What is Cancer anyway?
From American Cancer Society: “Cancer is a group of diseases characterised by uncontrolled growth and spread of abnormal cells. If the spread is not controlled, it can result in death.”
There are two types of tumour:
Benign (non cancerous): Rarely cause serious problems or threaten life unless they occur in a vital organ or grow very large and press on nearby tissues. Tends to grow slowly and stay in one place. Usually stays non-cancerous
Malignant (cancerous): Cancer cells have a  larger nucleus and behave, grow and function quite differently from normal cells. Vary in size and shape and grow uncontrolled, abnormal and interferes with functions of nearby cells, tissues and organs. Can return after removal

Cell Specialisation

From General to Specialised
The cell theory states that every cell comes from a previously existing cell
You started your life as a single fertilised egg. Now, your body is made up of cells (between 75-100 trillion cells) with different structures and different functions. How is this possible???
Cell Specialisation: involves a change in form and in function

Unspecialised to Specialised
Stem Cell: An animal cell that can differentiate (turn) into many different types of specialised cells
Can develop into different types of cells, based on DNA instructions
One combination of active and inactive genes will produce a specific type of cell (specialised)
Stem cells generally occur in clumps that differentiate together into tissues


Types of Stem Cells
Embryonic Stem Cells: can differentiate into any kind of cell (totipotent)
Are taken from human embryos
Tissue (Adult) Stem cells: only able to differentiate into certain types of cells (pluripotent)
Are taken from brain, bone marrow, blood vessels, skeletal muscle, skin, teeth, heart, gut, liver, etc.





Factors Influencing Cell Specialisation

Contents of Cell Cytoplasm
Mitosis results in daughter cells that have identical DNA, but the cells can have different cytoplasmic contents due to heredity
Contents of the cytoplasm in the daughter cells allows some cells to be specialised for certain tasks
Example: A cell with more vacuoles will be able to use more energy as it grows
Hormones may also influence specialisation

Influence of Neighbouring Cells
One of the biggest influences on what a cell will become
If cells are close together, a substance produced by one cell can diffuse into the neighbouring cell and change how the DNA is expressed
Example: in the developing embryo of a chick, neighbouring cells influence the eye development in a specific location

Other External Factors
Temperature, light, pH, available nutrients are examples of factors that influence how cells with identical DNA will develop
In Siamese cats, the dark spots of hair (on feet, tail and face) are a result of cells developing in cooler temperatures (as opposed to the rest of the body)
90% of issues in developing embryos are a result of environmental factors such as air quality, altitude exposure to heavy metals etc.

Cell Differentiation
Cell differentiation: a stage of development of a living organism during which specialised cells form
Genes are responsible for the proteins that are produced
When certain genes are turned ‘on’, the cell will produce a certain protein.. Therefore, the proteins that are produced determine the eventual function of the cell
Different combos of active and inactive genes will result in a unique types of cells (i.e. nerve or muscle cell)

Similar Experiences Produce similar Results
Cells that experience similar conditions as they grow will normally result in similar specialised cells
When groups of cell specialise the same way, tissues are formed
At a point in cells life, so many genes will be switched off that it will stop dividing (leaving the cell cycle) and live out it’s life as a mature specialised cell


Specialised Cells in Plants
Meristematic Cells: an unspecialised plant cell that gives rise to a specific specialised cell
Meristematic cells are always producing more cells
Are found in the meristem of the roots (apical bud), shoots (terminal bud) and stem (lateral bud)

Green Thumb Tip #1
Cells in actively growing areas give off a chemical called auxin (hormone) that stops the growth of cells around them
i.e the terminal bud’s auxin will limit the growth of the lateral buds
If a deer eats the terminal bud of a plant, the auxin stops being produced and the lateral bud is not inhibited to grow
If you enjoy gardening and you want to stop your plants/trees from growing too tall, but want them to grow bushier, what can you do?

Specialised Cells in Plants
In animals, while some cells and tissues can be replaced when they become old or damaged, organs must last a lifetime
However, in plants, organs are often replaced over time (i.e. leaves & roots)





Tissues Working Together

Photosynthesis is performed by chlorophyll molecules embedded in the thylakoid membranes
of the chloroplasts in the cells of leaves. Leaves are efficient at absorbing light
due to their thin, wide structure.

Light energy + carbon dioxide + water = glucose + oxygen   CO2 + H2O = C6H12O6 + O2

Glucose is transported and stored as other carbohydrates, such as starch. Plants
use these carbohydrates for cellular respiration.
Stomata Opening in leaf surface that allows gas exchange. Open and close to allow
Carbon dioxide in and oxygen out. Guard cells pair of cells on surface to control stomata opening and closing. Open and close stomata to ensure proper gas exchange and reduce water loss. Water is moved to the leaves from the roots via the xylem.



            

Animal Tissues: The Fabric of Your Body

From Cells to Tissues
Tissues: a group of cells similar in shape that work together to perform a specialised function
The human body is made up of four primary types of tissue: 1. Epithelial 2. Connective 3. Muscle 4. Nervous

Epithelial Tissues
Thing covering that protects organs, lines body cavities, and covers the surface of the body
Examples:
Outer layer of the skin
Inside of the mouth and stomach
Tissue surrounding the body’s organs

Connective Tissues
Connective tissue provides support and holds various parts of the body together
Examples: Inner layers of skin, tendons, ligaments, cartilage, bone, and fat tissue 
Interesting fact: Blood is also considered a form of connective tissue

Muscle Tissues
Muscle tissues contract to produce different types of movement. There are 3 types of muscle tissue:
Cardiac muscles: heart muscle that circulates the blood throughout your body (involuntary)
Skeletal Muscles: muscles around bone (i.e. leg and arm) which allow you to walk (voluntary)
Smooth muscle: on walls of the digestive tract, uterus, bladder, blood vessels, other internal organs (involuntary)
Nervous Tissues
Allows for communication between all parts of the body
Cells/tissues generate and conduct electrical impulses
Controlled by the brain
Transported to the body by the spinal cord



Circulatory System

Parts of the Circulatory System
Blood
Veins and arteries
Heart

The Function of the Circulatory System
Moves nutrients from intestines to body cells
Moves oxygen from the lungs to body cells
Carries waste from cells to colon for disposal
Carries carbon dioxide from cells back to lungs for disposal

Function continued
Carries waste to the kidneys where the substances are filtered out and excreted
Regulates body temperature
Transports disease-fighting white blood cells to areas infected by bacteria or viruses

Blood is a type of connective tissue and consists of four components
Red blood cells make up half of the volume of blood and contain haemoglobin
Haemoglobin is a protein containing iron that transports oxygen throughout the body and makes the cells appear red
The bi-concave shape allows RBCs to bend and flow smoothly through the narrowest blood vessels
Red blood cells are considered cells, but they lack a nucleus, DNA, and organelles
White blood cells are infection fighting cells in the blood. They make up less than 1% of the volume of blood and they are the only blood cells to have a nucleus
Platelets are tiny cells that help clotting and compose less than 1% of the blood
A lack or absence of clotting factors that work with platelets is called haemophilia
Plasma is a protein rich liquid that carries the blood cells, chemical messengers, and nutrients along
Plasma makes up over half of the volume of blood

How the Heart functions
Four chambers: Right atrium, right ventricle, left atrium, and left ventricle
The cardiac tissue in each part of the heart contracts at the same time and this makes the heart contract and move the blood around the body

Following the Flow of Blood
The atria receive blood and move it into the ventricles; the ventricles pump blood out of the heart
The right side of the heart receives oxygen-poor blood (deoxygenated) from the body; the left side of the heart receives oxygen-rich blood (oxygenated) from the lungs

Blood vessels: Arteries, Veins, and Capillaries
Arteries carry blood away from the heart and have thicker walls than other blood vessels
More elastic and are under more pressure as they vary pumped blood away from the heart
Veins carry blood towards the heart at a lower pressure so the walls of the veins are not as thick and they contain valves to prevent blood from pooling
Varicose veins result in the pooling of blood and can be caused by pregnancy
Capillary beds: tiny vessels with thin walls
Allow oxygen & nutrients to diffuse from the bloodstream
Allow carbon dioxide and waste to diffuse from the cells
These vessels are so small that red blood cells must pass one at a time

Diseases of the Circulatory System: Coronary Artery Disease
Coronary arteries supply oxygen and nutrients to the heart muscles
Arteries can become narrowed by a deposit of fat, cholesterol, and calcium called plaque
Can be caused by genetics, high fat diet, smoking and lack of exercise

Diseases of the Circulatory System: HEART ATTACK!!!!!
Occurs when arteries become completely blocked by plaque or a blood clot. The muscle cells no longer receive oxygen and nutrients and die. The heart can also stop pumping
A blood test or an electrocardiogram can detect a heart attack.

Signs and symptoms of a Heart Attack
Chest pain or pressure radiating down the arm, shortness of breath
Nausea, anxiety, upper body pain, stomach pain, dizziness, fatigue
Signs can differ for females as more of an upset stomach or abdominal pain and aren’t treated rapidly enough so there is a greater chance of death or disability in females from lack of or delayed treatment


Respiratory System

Diffusion – Remember me? 
Gas exchange is made possible due to DIFFUSION (movement of particles from high → lower concentration)
What do you need to make this possible in the body? 
Permeable or semipermeable membrane (i.e. Cell Wall)

Structure for Function
Structure promotes efficiency of system
Tight capillary/alveoli network
Only TWO thin membranes to pass through
Two way movement
Surface area is critical

Capillary Function
Bring oxygen into the blood (red blood cells) – via diffusion
Remove carbon dioxide from the blood – via diffusion

Just Breathe
Breathing is controlled by a set of muscles around the rib cage and the diaphragm (large sheet of muscle under lungs).
These two muscle ‘groups’ work together to increase/decrease the volume of the lungs
Change in volume = change in pressure = movement of gases 



Digestive System

The Mouth
Ingestion is the 1st stage of digestion
Digestion begins in the mouth
Activity: Digesting Bread
Chemical Digestion
Salivary amylase (enzyme mixed with water) initiates carbohydrate digestion
Saliva lubricates food so it can be swallowed
Physical Digestion
Chewing & dissolving of food particles
Incisors → cutting
Canine → tearing 
Premolars → grinding

The Esophagus
Muscular tube connecting mouth to stomach
Made up of special smooth muscle tissue
Does food move down the esophagus because of gravity or by another mechanism? 
HINT: Can food be swallowed even when a person stands on his or her head?
Peristalsis: Rhythmic muscle contractions in esophagus that move food along gastrointestinal tract to the stomach
Like toothpaste being squeezed out of a tube
Where else in the body might peristalsis be found? Intestines

What is the Stomach???
Site of food storage & initial protein digestion 
J-shaped organ that has numerous ridges allowing it to expand
Layers of muscle that contract to help digestion

Stomach
Can hold ~ 1.5 L of food
Stomach lining contains cells that produce gastric fluids 
Mucus acts as protective coating
HCl(aq) kills harmful substances that are ingested with food
Stomach has many nerves that signal when we have had enough to eat 
Q: What happens when you eat too fast? It forces you to throw up
Sphincters regulate food in/out of stomach
Sphincters → work like strings on a bag
Cardiac Sphincter: Located near the heart
Pyloric Sphincter: Regulates movement of food & stomach acid to small intestine 

The Intestine
Small Intestine
3 parts (duodenum, jejunum and ileum)
Most digestion takes place in duodenum (first 25cm)
Up to 6m long (2.5cm diameter)
Cells release mucus and nutrients diffuse through wall of small intestine into bloodstream
Large Intestine (aka: Colon)
1.5m long and 7.6cm diameter
Lining absorbs water from indigestible food 
Remaining solid matter is excreted as feces from anus

Rectum and Anus
Last 20cm of large intestine
Waste eliminated through the anus
Indigestible components of food (cellulose and other fibres)
Controlled by two anal sphincters 
Absorption of water in large intestine changes liquid material in colon into solid called feces
Too much water absorbed into bloodstream – feces hard (constipation)

Colitis and Crohn’s disease
Colitis is inflammation of the mucous membrane or inner lining of the colon and rectum
Can be caused by viruses, bacteria or narrowed blood vessels
Crohn’s disease is inflammation of the full thickness of the bowel wall rather than just the lining
Crohn’s disease may affect any part of the digestive tract from the mouth to the anus
Symptoms: diarrhea, cramping, abdominal pain, blood in stool, ulcers, reduced appetite and weight loss

Accessory Organs
Liver produces bile, helps breakdown fats
Pancreas produces insulin, regulates glucose in blood
Note: diabetes occurs when pancreas produces too much or too little insulin
Releases bicarbonate ions (HCO3-) to intestine to neutralise HCI
Gallbladder stores excess bile



Chemistry

Grade 9 Chemistry Review

Particle Theory 

Matter is made up of tiny particles (Atoms & Molecules)
Particles of Matter are in constant motion
Particles of Matter are held together by very strong electric forces
There are empty spaces between the particles of matter that are very large compared to the particles themselves
Each substance has unique particles that are different from the particles of other substances
Temperature affects the speed of the particles. The higher the temperature, the faster the speed of the particles

Describing Matter: Physical characteristics

State: solid, liquid, gas.
Colour: green, blue, yellow, black, reddish-brown, etc.
Odour: odourless, flowery, spicy, nauseating, etc.
Clarity: clear, cloudy, opaque.
Lustre: shiny, dull.
Texture: how does it feel? fine, coarse, smooth, waxy, etc.)
Brittleness: can it break apart or shatter easily? brittle or flexible
Malleability: can it be bent and folded into different shapes? malleable or
non-malleable
Ductility: can it be stretched out into a long wire? ductile or non-ductile

Describing Matter: Chemical characteristics

*A chemical characteristic is something that allows us to identify how a
substance reacts or behaves with others. For example:
 Reactivity: A substance can be very reactive (like fireworks) or unreactive
(like gold).
Toxicity: A substance can be poisonous (like arsenic) or harmless (like
water, or sugar)
Flammability: A substance can be flammable (like gasoline) or not burn
(like salt)




Physical and Chemical Changes

*Matter can undergo both physical and chemical changes.
*A physical change usually involves a change in a physical characteristic only.
*A chemical change results in the formation of a new substance. Because the
new substance is different, it can have very different physical characteristics
from the starting substance. So a chemical change usually will result in a
change in the physical characteristics as well.








Indicators of Chemical Change

Production of a gas

Formation of a precipitate → formation of a solid

If two or more solutions of substances are mixed and a solid is formed, then
such a solid is called a precipitate and indicates that a chemical reaction has occurred.

Change in colour or odour

If when two substances are mixed and a new colour is formed or a new
odour is detected, then it is an indication that a new substance was formed
which can only occur with a chemical reaction. Note that the colour formed must be different from the original colours.

Change in energy of System

If two substances are mixed and the mixture either releases
or absorbs then a chemical change is occurring. A reaction
that releases heat is called exothermic. A reaction can also absorb heat from the surroundings and such a chemical change would be called endothermic.

Introduction to Chemistry

Chemistry is the study of matter. 
Matter is anything that takes up space and has mass. 
All matter is made up of small particles called atoms.
 Atoms and elements are synonyms.

Atoms
The atom is the basic unit of matter. Atoms are made of protons, electrons and neutrons. Atoms of different elements have different numbers of protons, neutrons and electrons.

Elements
There are currently 121 known elements. 4 new elements discovered in 2016
Atoms of all of these 117 elements are chemically combined to make every known substance.
At room temperature most elements are solid, a few are gases and only mercury and bromine are liquids
All known types of atoms are found on the periodic table of the elements


Data about an element
A periodic table usually shows the elements’ name, symbol, atomic number and atomic mass. Rules for naming chemical symbols: 
Symbol always starts with a capital
The second letter must be lowercase
The symbol must be printed (no handwriting)

Why group elements?
So that an element can be identified easily.
Ex: metals on the left, non-metals at the right
There are six major groups to learn

Metals
All are solids except mercury 
Generally shiny and malleable
Good conductors of heat & electricity
Alkali metals
Low melting and boiling points compared to most other metals
They are very soft and can be cut easily with a knife
They have low densities (lithium, sodium and potassium will float on water)
They react quickly with water
Their hydroxides and oxides dissolve in water to form alkaline solutions

Non-metals
Poor conductors of heat & electricity
Many are gases at room temperature

Metalloids
Are elements that possess both metallic & non-metallic properties
Are found along the step line of the periodic table

Halogens
Occupy the 17th column
Most reactive of non-metals and are usually found bonded to other atoms
React with metals to form salts

Noble Gases
Occupy the 18th (far right) column
All are gases at room temperature
Extremely stable, un-reactive


Multiple groups
Elements can be in more than one group. 
Ex #1: Sodium is both a metal and an alkali metal
Ex #2: Neon is both a noble gas and a nonmetal

Bohr Diagram

In 1913 Danish scientist Niels Bohr began representing atoms visually through diagrams. He
called them Bohr diagrams and he believed they were useful for (i) better understanding the
properties of an element, and for (ii) predicting how an atom can combine with others to form
compounds. In this model of the atom, the electrons travel around the nucleus in well-defined
circular paths known as shells or orbitals.

Before we learn how to draw Bohr Diagrams, we must understand 4 important principles:
Each electron in an atom has a definite amount of energy.
The farther away the electron is from the nucleus, the greater the energy.
      (c) Electrons cannot exist between levels, but can only move up and down orbitals.
      (d) The electrons in the outermost shell are called valence electrons.

Steps for Drawing Bohr Diagrams (for use only with the first 20 elements):
Determine the number of electrons to be drawn: # electrons = atomic #(for a
neutral atom)
Draw a circle for the nucleus and write the element symbol inside
Draw levels (circles) around the nucleus. The periods of the element in the periodic table is the number of orbitals.
Fill the levels with electrons according to the following pattern:
1st orbital (nearest to the nucleus): filled first, with a maximum of 2 electrons; don’t pair
2nd orbital: filled with a maximum of 8 electrons; draw electrons in pair in this orbital
3rd orbital: filled with a maximum of 8 electrons; draw electrons in pair in this orbital
4th orbital: filled with a maximum of 2 electrons; don’t pair




 
 





Lewis Dot Diagrams

“What is a Lewis Diagram??”
It is a short-hand of a Bohr-Rutherford Diagram in which only the valence electrons are written as dots.

“How do I do it?”
Find the total number of valence electrons for the atoms you are working with. (i.e. sodium, Na, has 2 valence electrons)
This can be done by looking at the columns (i.e. groups) in the periodic table. For example, group 1 elements all have 1 valence electron; group 2 elements all have 2; group 13 have 3, group 14 have 4 etc.)

Practice: Write the Lewis diagrams of the following elements, representative of the groups. Note that every member of the group will have the same Lewis diagram.


Representing Ionic Compounds – Part 1

Success Criteria: At the end of this lesson, you will be able to:
Explain the differences between elements and compounds.
Explain what ionic compounds are, how they are formed and understand
some of their unique properties.
Represent ionic compounds as Lewis structures.
 
Element: 
A substance that cannot be broken down into simpler substances by chemical means. elements are composed of atoms that have the same atomic number.

Compounds
A compound is a pure substance made up of two or more elements, in which the elements are chemically combined. The connection between the elements is known as a bond.
A small change in the way the atoms combine can make a big difference in the chemical and physical properties of compounds.


The Formation of Compounds
Although millions of compounds have been discovered, almost all of them
can be classified as one of two types: Ionic(take) and molecular (covalent [share]).
The key to understanding the formation of compounds is understanding the arrangement of the electrons around the nucleus.
The farther away an electron is from the nucleus, the greater is its energy and the more likely it is to be involved in a chemical change.
Thus, the electrons in the outer orbit (i.e. the valence electrons) are the electrons involved in bonding.
Therefore, knowing the number of valence electrons helps you to know how a compound will form.
Elements in the same group (vertical column) have the same number of valence electrons.

Atoms
most stable when valence shell is full (2 or 8 e’s) eg. He, Ne, ...
get a stable valence shell by:
Loses e- (becomes +ve ion: a cation) ionic bonds
Gain e-(becomes –ve ion: an anion) ionic bonds
Share e- covalent bond covalent bond

In either case the ionic/molecular compound formed is Electrically neutral.

Ionic Compounds

In ionic compounds, electrons are transferred from one atom to another (or to several others) so that the atoms can have the stable electron arrangements of the closest noble gases. Salt (NaCl) is an example of an ionic compound made up of ions of opposite charges that attract each other. The attraction between the ions is called an ionic bond.
Lewis diagrams can be used to show the transfer of electrons.
Ionic compounds have a number of properties in common including
hardness, melting points, solubility (ability to dissolve), and conductivity.

Properties of Ionic Compounds

are solid at room temperature
have high melting points (i.e. strong force of attraction
between charged ions)
are electrolytes (i.e. form solutions that conduct electricity)


Bonding in Ionic Compounds

Ionic Compounds
Electrostatic attraction between a metal and non-metal
Metal lose electrons and nonmetal gain electrons
Ions are attracted to the opposite charge
Overall, compound is neutral
Formation of ions
E.g. Ca + Cl

Number of electrons lost by the metal must equal the number of electrons gained by non-metal.
Cations and anions form a regular repeating pattern producing a crystal lattice in which the ions are in a specific arrangement.
Attraction between oppositely charged particles is strong
High melting points because of strong forces of attraction
Conduct electricity when they are molten or dissolved in water as this allows the ions to move freely - move



	









Ionic Compounds – Name and Formulae

Counting Atoms:
A molecule’s chemical formula specifies the types of atoms (elements) that make up the
molecule, as well as the number of atoms of each element.





Writing Formulae

There are basic steps to follow when writing the formula for an ionic compound. First determine if it is an ionic compound? In other words, does it contain a metal  and a nonmetal

Once you have determined that it is an ionic compound then:


Example 1:

Calcium Phosphide
Write the symbols of the elements with the metal first, then the non-metal.
Ca	P

Write the ionic charge of each element, above and to the right, for each element.
Ca2+	P3-

Criss-cross the numbers down to become subscripts on the opposite element.
Ca3	P2	

Cancel to the lowest ratio by dividing by the largest common factor.
	Ca3P2

Example 2:

Beryllium Oxide

Is it ionic?
Be	O
Be2+	O2-
Be2	O2
BeO

Example 3:

Sodium Nitrogen

Na1+	N3-
Na2Se

Example 4:

Silver Nitride

Ag3N


Writing Names

When naming an ionic compound, the metal cation is first then the nonmetal anion. The first element's name does not change. The second element ends in ide.

Example 1:

Al2S3

Aluminium Sulfide


Representing Ionic Compounds - Part 2

Multivalent Elements

Transition Metals have more than 1 ionic charge and are able to form more than one kind of ion. These compounds are named in the same way as other ionic compounds, except that the charge on the metal is written, in brackets, as a Roman Numerals after the name of the metal.




You ONLY use the Roman numeral system when naming the ions of metals that can have more than one ionic charge.

Names and Formulas involving Multivalent Elements

Compounds that contain a multivalent element are named in the same way as other
ionic compounds, except that the charge on the metal is written, in brackets, as a Roman Numeral after the name of the metal (i.e. Iron (II) oxide).

Formulas for compounds that contain a multivalent element are written in the same
way as other ionic compounds. The charge on the metal ion is indicated by the Roman
numeral located in the set of brackets after the name of the metal.

Representing Ionic Compounds - Part 3
(Refer to pgs 148 - 150) 

Polyatomic Ions

Polyatomic ions are groups of atoms that tend to stay together and carry an overall charge.
There is only one common positive polyatomic ion: Ammonium (NH4+).

Compounds Containing Polyatomic Ions

Processed foods contain a lot of sodium, mostly from Sodium Chloride.
Sodium chloride enhances the flavour and extends the shelf-life of food. Other additives processed foods also contribute to your daily sodium intake. 
Preserved meats, such as hot dogs, stay red due to the addition of Potassium Nitrate K+NO3- and Sodium Nitrite.
Polyatomic compounds are pure substances that involve combinations of metals with polyatomic ions.



There are many types of polyatomic ions, but one special group should be mentioned.
oxyacids are compounds formed when hydrogen combines with
polyatomic ions that contain oxygen.







Note: The hydrogen has an ionic charge of 1+ in these compounds.
When a compound containing a polyatomic ion, such as sodium phosphate (Na3PO4) dissolves, the four ions separate. However, the phosphate ion remains intact.

Names and Formulas involving Polyatomic Ions

The name for compounds that contain a polyatomic ion are simply a combination of
the name of the metal and the name of the polyatomic ion.
Formulas for compounds that contain a polyatomic ion are written in the same way as
other ionic compounds except brackets are necessary when more than one polyatomic 
ion is needed.

Note: If a formula uses the ammonium ion NH4+ it will go first in the formula (since the positive ion goes first).



Representing Molecular Compounds

Molecular Compounds (non-metal +  non-metal)

The atoms in molecular compounds (also called covalent compounds) Share electrons to form stable arrangements of the closest noble gas. As a result, the molecules they form are neutral. Ice (H2O) is an example of a molecular compound made up of neutral molecules. The bond between shared pairs of electrons is called a covalent/molecular bond.













Q: There is a less structured arrangement of the molecules within a molecular compound
in comparison to those within an ionic compound. Why?


Lewis diagrams can also be used to show the sharing of electrons.















Properties of Molecular Compounds

Molecular compounds have properties that distinguish them from ionic compounds.
Solubility in water: some are soluble in water, but most are not.
Melting and boiling point: the forces holding the molecules together are quite weak. They have low melting and boiling points.
Conductivity: Molecular compounds do not form ions. Therefore they do not conduct electricity when dissolved in water. (Exception: acids)
While the force of attraction between the molecules is weak (since the molecules are neutral), it is important to remember that the bonds between the atoms in the molecule itself are strong.

Diatomic Molecules

H2 and N2 are examples of diatomic molecules – a molecule that is made from two atoms of the same element. Since they form the shape of a “7” in the periodic table, they are sometimes referred to as the “magnificent seven.” NOTE: Diatomic molecules can also be a combination of two atoms of different elements (i.e. CO, NO, MgO).
 The seven are:
HOFBrINCl the Clown: H2 O2 F2 Br2 I2 N2 Cl2



Conservation of Mass and Chemical Equations - Part 1

Chemical Reactions

Chemical reactions may involve sophisticated chemicals, as in the explosive reaction of dynamite, or simple household materials, as in the reaction of a bathroom cleaner with a stain. They may occur constantly, as in the growth of your body, or occasionally, as in the changing colour of leaves in the fall. In a chemical reaction, one or more substances change to produce new substances. Each starting substance in the reaction is called a reactants; each new substance formed is called a products. Because there are so many chemical reactions, it is important to have a clear and consistent way of describing them. For example, carbon + oxygen = carbon dioxide.
                               Reactant             Product                     

For convenience, chemists use two types of equations to describe chemical reactions.
In a word equation, names are used to represent each chemical.
In a chemical equation, chemical formulas are used to represent each chemical. For example, when carbon (C) burns, it reacts with oxygen (O2) to form carbon dioxide (CO2). The equations for this reaction are: 
word equation: Carbon + oxygen → Carbon Dioxide
chemical equation: C + O2  → CO2
Note:

Word and chemical equations are always read from left to right, with the reactants located on the left and the products on the right
The arrow describes the direction of the reaction and is read “produces”
A plus sign between chemical symbols is read as “and”• the state of each substance is indicated by placing the appropriate symbol in brackets after the formula – (s) for solid, (l) for liquid, (g) for gas, and (aq) for solutions

For example, when pop is bottled, pressurized carbon dioxide is pumped into the
pop. Some carbon dioxide reacts with water to produce carbonic acid. The (aq) state
symbol tells you that carbonic acid is dissolved in water. Dissolved acids give pop its tart
taste.
word equation: Carbon Dioxide + Water → Carbonic Acid 
chemical equation: CO2 + H2O → H2CO3

And when you open a bottle of pop, you release the pressure inside the bottle. This causes some carbonic acid molecules to break apart, releasing bubbles of carbon dioxide. The chemical reaction for this is the reverse of the one just discussed.
word equation: Carbonic Acid → Carbon Dioxide + Water
chemical equation: H2CO3 → C + O2

Combustion reactions 

A combustion reaction is a chemical reaction in which a substance rapidly combines with oxygen gas to produce oxides. 

We often call this process burning. One way to represent combustion is using the following word equation: 
Fuel +oxygen -> oxides + energy 

The most important fuels that we burn are hydrocarbons. Gasoline in our automobiles, natural gas in our home furnaces, kerosene in jet airplanes, and even the candles on a birthday cake re all made of hydrocarbons. The complete combustion of a hydrocarbon can be represented as 
Hydrocarbon + oxygen -> carbon dioxide + water +energy 

However, when there is not enough oxygen, hydrocarbons undergo incomplete combustion. 

Hydrocarbon + oxygen -> carbon dioxide + water +energy + carbon + carbon monoxide. 







