1.1 Sustainability
Ecosystem - all of the interacting parts of a biological community and its environment
Terrestrial Ecosystem - an ecosystem that is land-based
Aquatic Ecosystem - an ecosystem that is water-based, either freshwater or saltwater

Sustainable ecosystem - an ecosystem that is capable of withstanding pressure and giving support to  variety of organisms
The “Lorax”, and Easter Island were not sustainable ecosystems

Parts of an Ecosystem
Biotic - the living parts of an ecosystem, for e.g. plants, animals, and micro-organisms
Characteristics of an ecosystem
Symbiosis - the interaction between members of two different species that live together in a close association
E.g. Tree and mushroom
Predation - when one organism consumes another organism
E.g. Lion and Gazelle
Competition - when two or more organisms compete for the same resource, such as food, in the same location at the same	 time
E.g. dandelions and grass
Abiotic - the non-living parts of an ecosystem
For example, the biotic world needs the following characteristics to survive…


Read page 12 and fill in the abiotic chart


Cycling of Matter and Earth’s Spheres
Lithosphere - the hard part of Earth’s surface
Hydrosphere - all the water found on Earth, including lakes, oceans, and groundwater
Atmosphere - the layers of gases above the Earth’s surface
Biosphere - the regions of Earth where living organisms exist (found only on the Earth)

The four nutrient Cycles
Nutrients - a chemical that is essential to living things and is cycled through ecosystems
The water cycle
The carbon cycle
The nitrogen cycle
The phosphorus cycle



Human Activities and Nutrient Cycles
Eutrophication- a process in which nutrient levels in aquatic ecosystems increases leading to an increase in the populations of primary producers
Fertilizer runs off from farmland to water
Algae bloom
Submerged plants die due to reduced light
Algae and other plants die
Bacteria uses oxygen during decomposition
Oxygen levels drop and fish start to die



Social Policy on these Human Activities
In 1972, Canada and the USA signed the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement where they would “restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the waters of the Great Lakes Basin Ecosystem.”
Environmental Farm Plans have been examined and developed to reduce the impact of phosphorus coming to their farms.
Municipal, provincial, and national courts have been passing by-laws to reduce pesticides since 1991.

The Water Cycle

The Nitrogen cycle 


The Phosphorus Cycle
Phosphorus is found in the ground, leaching acts like a sponge and allows the spread of  substance. 




1.2 The Biosphere and Energy
All activities require a source of energy(fuel), which can be solar energy, sugar, gasoline, etc.

Photosynthesis and the Sun’s energy
Since the sun is able to supply energy to the Earth for a very long time, this conversion of solar energy to chemical energy in photosynthesis is very important to the biosphere and all life. Primary producers are able to harvest this solar energy using photosynthesis. Chlorophyll is a green pigment on leaves and is useful in the photosynthesis process.



What are the main benefits of photosynthesis? 
Produces Glucose
Adds oxygen to the atmosphere 
Remove CO2 from the atmosphere











Trophic Levels
Trophic level - a category of organisms that is defined by how the organisms gain their energy

Biomass
Biomass- the total mass of living organisms in a defined group or area

Trophic Efficiency - a measure of the amount of energy or biomass transferred from one trophic level lto the next higher trophic level

The higher the trophic level, the less efficient the organisms in the trophic level are in retaining this converted solar energy (biomass). Why?
Herbivores and omnivores may not eat all the parts of the plant
Carnivores and omnivores do not digest all parts of an animal
At every level, energy is lost as heat from the bodies of organisms












Water Pollution and Bioaccumulation
Bioaccumulation - a process in which materials, especially toxins, are ingested by an organism at a rate greater than they are eliminated

Biomagnification - a process where the concentration of a toxin increases as it moves up one trophic level to the next




1.3 Extracting Energy from Biomass
Cellular Respiration - a process that releases energy from organic molecules, especially carbohydrates, in the presence of oxygen
Used by plants, animals, fungi, and other organisms

Fermentation - a process that releases energy from organic molecules, especially carbohydrates, in the absence of oxygen

Cellular Respiration:
C6H12O6 + 6O2  ->  6CO2 + 6H2O + energy released
Glucose + oxygen -> carbon dioxide + water + energy released

Extracting energy from Food
Even though plants produce their own food (glucose) they will need to use cellular respiration to break glucose down to get energy from it.


Carbon Dioxide and Other Greenhouse Gases
Greenhouse Gases - atmospheric gases that prevent heat from leaving the atmosphere, thus increasing the temperature of the atmosphere (e.g. water vapour, methane, and carbon dioxide)

Greenhouse effect - the natural warming of Earth as a result of greenhouse gases, which traps some of the energy that would otherwise leave Earth (without this the Earth’s temperature would average 0°c instead of 14°c)

Biomass and Fossil Fuels
Over time, biomass that was not cycled through the biosphere, but settled into places on Earth that had little oxygen was changed into fossil fuels with a lot of pressure and heat. These fossil fuels would include coal, petroleum, and natural gas. When we now burn fossil fuels, oxygen is required for the reaction, and carbon dioxide is produced. This is similar to cellular respiration.

Since the industrial revolution, our human activities have increased the amount of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, that it is the cause of global warming.




Initiatives that help reduce carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
↓ page 31

Hmwk: pg 36 #2,4 2. It requires oxygen 4. In the last 400 years people have been digging up fossil fuels, and making factories producing more and more carbon dioxide. If that was not done, the levels of carbon dioxide would not have grown that quickly, although the population is still growing which will lead to more carbon dioxide. 








2.1 Population and Resources
Population - all the individuals of a species that occupy a particular geographic area at a certain time

How do you increase the population of one species?
Reproduction rate: increase
Death Rate: decrease

Exponential Growth - accelerating population growth that produces a J-shaped curve when the population is graphed against time (pg. 49)
E.G. Elephants (fig 2.1), Turkeys, Yellow Perch
This is not sustainable in nature because of limiting factors

Limiting factor- a factor that limits the growth, distribution, or amount of a population in an ecosystem (e.g. land, food, resources, etc.)

_ - the size of a population that can be supported indefinitely by the available resources and services of an ecosystem
Beyond this carrying capacity, no additional individuals can be supported long term
When a population is maintained at its carrying capacity, it is at an equilibrium
Example 1: (Fig 2.5)
	Pg. 51 fur seals in the 1900s (curve flatten)
Example 2:
Flying squirrels - limited by available habitat


Urban Sprawl - the growth of relatively low-density development on the edges of urban areas
As the growth of the population is near the edge of the city, more new homes and businesses are seen there (suburbia)
Increased dependency on automobiles
Decreased farmlands as roads are built
Decreased carrying capacities for plants/animals
                                          ↪Less space for habitats and resources
Example: Redside Dace (fish)
Pg. 53

Intensification Policy- set by Ontario to keep newly developed buildings to be within the city boundary
Increase Population density
Decrease Pressure on natural areas and farmland











2.2 Interaction Among Species
	

2.3 Human Niches

Sustainable use – use that does not lead to long-term depletion of a resource or affect the diversity of the ecosystem from which the resources is obtained
Helps meet the needs of present and future generations
If humans do not use resources in a sustainable way, our _______ may shrink again over time
Ecological niche – the way an organism occupies a position in an ecosystem, including all the necessary biotic and abiotic factors (i.e. the role that they play in the ecosystem including the resources that they use)
Humans constantly increase their own carrying capacity due to improvements in medical care, technology, agriculture, education
Human population has had a steady but not explosive growth up until the 1400s  
Before the 1400s it took the world’s population ~650 years to double 
Since then, the doubling time for the world’s population was only 60(See Fig 2.18)
Doubling Time – the period of time that is required for a population to double in size
Ecological Footprint – a measure of the impact of an individual or a population on the environment in terms of energy consumption, land use and waste production
Measures the amount of land/water needed to support an individual’s standard of living 
The average Canadians ecological footprint is well above the world average(Fig. 2.19) 
My Ecological Footprint: 69.420 Earths would be needed if the earth’s population shared my lifestyle
Sustainability – use of Earth’s resources, including land and water, at levels that can continue forever
Accomplished through consuming fewer resources and using existing resources more efficient through technological innovation, energy efficiency and recycling

3.1 Measuring Biodiversity
Biodiversity – the number and variety of organisms found within a specific region
Protect – to guard legally from harm to a species that is listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern.

3.2 Communities
Community – all the populations of the different species that interact in a specific area or ecosystem
Species that can greatly affect their community
Dominant Species – species that are so abundant that they have the biggest biomass of any community member

In terrestrial environments, the species with the largest biomass are 
plants (primary producers)

Removing the dominant species in an ecosystem, will 
decrease biodiversity
For example,  all American chestnut trees were killed by an accidentally introduced fungus in 1950, birds/mammals were not affected but instead  7 North American species of insects 
became extinct
Keystone Species – a species that can greatly affect populations numbers and the health of an ecosystem
Generally not abundant
Can be plants or animals
Examples:
Prairie dogs build burrows in huge colonies , a.k.a. “dog towns”.  They were once hunted and killed as they were seen as farm pests.  This keystone species is important to help increase plant diversity, turning tonnes of soil, increasing nitrogen content of the soil, and allowing deeper water penetration of soil.
b)Captive Breeding – the breeding of rare or endangered wildlife in controlled settings to increase the population size

They are grown in places like the zoo, following a program that trains them to capture wild prey, avoid natural risks encountered in the wild, and then they are then reintroduced into the wild
Ecosystem Engineer – a species that causes such dramatic changes to landscapes that it creates a new ecosystem
E.g. beavers can convert a small stream in a forest into an aquatic ecosystem
Ponds create calm, slower waters  and a easier food supply for juvenile fish, migrating birds,  and aquatic insects
Tree-cutting activities creates clearings in the forest

Succession – the series of changes in an ecosystem that occurs over time, following a disturbance


Homework: Pg.99# 2-4
















3.3 Threats to Biodiversity
Habitat Loss – the Destruction of habitats, which usually results from human activities
Sources of habitat destruction:
Through nature:  Severe Storms, earthquakes, wildfires, volcanoes, etc.
Through humans: deforestation, building dams, draining wetlands
deforestation – the practice of clearing forests for logging or other human uses, and never replanting them 

Draining Wetlands
areas of land that are covered  by water for most of the year
Alien Species– a species that is accidentally or deliberately introduced into a new location
Usually arrive by accident through shipments (e.g. in a large amount of water picked up by a cargo ship), but may be introduced on purpose

Most are harmless or beneficial to the new environment, though, they may also be an invasive species (a species that can take over the habitat of native species or invade their bodies)
Zebra Mussels were introduced from Asia to the Great Lakes in the 1980s.  Since then a shrimp-like crustacean that shares the same food source as the zebra mussels has decreased in number.
Round Gobies (fish) also came to the Great Lakes through ship water (called ballast water), and they have grown exponentially since.

Overexploitation – the use or extraction of a resource until it is deplete (through overhunting and overfishing)
e.g. yellowfish tuna, Atlantic cod, and passenger pigeon

Disrupting Connectivity across Ecosystems
How can salmon, which live in aquatic ecosystems, be connected to terrestrial-dwelling trees in temperate rainforests?

Salmon hatch in freshwater streams in the temperate rainforest.
Salmon spend their adult life in the Pacific ocean, picking up nutrients from the marine ecosystem.
Salmon return to their birthplace to spawn.
Bears move salmon into the forest  Nutrients released from the salmons’ decaying bodies are absorbed by plants in the forest.

Extinction – the death of all the individual of a species
Could be a background(subtle and overtime) extinction or through mass extinction (sudden change)
Biodiversity crisis – the current accelerated rate of extinctions
Nowadays, through technology, ecologists estimate that the current rate of extinction is 100 to 1000 times higher than a normal background rate!
3.4 Restoration Ecology 
Genesis 1:28
 And God blessed them. And God said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over every living thing that moves on the earth.”

Stewardship – the active assumption of the responsibility for the welfare of the environment
Restoration Ecology – the renewal of degraded or destroyed ecosystems through active human intervention
