Cover Letter

A Cover Letter accompanies a resume and serves as a way to describe, in more detail, your qualifications and suitability for a particular position. Employers often use cover letters to weed out candidates that will be called in for an interview. Please use one of the job listings posted to our Google Classroom to apply for. Write a cover letter for this position.

--FORMAT--

Your Contact Information
Name
Email address

Date
Employer Contact Information (if you have it)
Name
Title
Company
 
Salutation
Dear Mr./Ms. Last Name OR Full Name (Gender unknown) OR  Hiring Committee,
Body of Cover Letter
The body of your cover letter lets the employer know what position you are applying for and why the employer should select you for an interview. Organize the body of your cover letter into the following paragraphs:
·   	First Paragraph
The first paragraph of your letter should include information on why you are applying. Mention the position you are applying for and where you found the job listing. Include the name of a mutual contact, if you have one. Here is a good place to make a connection to the overall mission/values of the organization. (What impressed you? Why do you want to work for this company?) 

 ·   Middle Paragraph(s)
The next section of your cover letter should describe what you have to offer the employer. Mention specifically how your qualifications match the job you are applying for. Think of this section of the cover letter as making a pitch for your fit as an employee and what makes you a great candidate. Keep in mind that employers will be more interested in what you can do for them than a list of your background information. Make the connection between your qualifications and the job requirements clear. Use this section to interpret your resume—don't repeat from it verbatim. You may also include a pithy (short) anecdote IF relevant. A great way to brainstorm for this section (which should also be the longest portion of the letter) is to make a T-chart (the skills, etc. the job is looking for on one side and your skills/experiences on the other). If you can include a BRIEF anecdote or example of a particular qualification you meet that is of high importance to the employer, this would be the best paragraph to include it in.

·   	Final Paragraph 
Conclude your cover letter by thanking the employer for considering you for the position. You can briefly restate why you would be a good fit for the position using different words or a wrap-up sentence. End with a call-to-action (For example: “I welcome a meeting to further discuss my interest and abilities.”)

Closing
Respectfully yours,
Signature
Handwritten Signature (for a hard copy letter)
Typed Signature
***YOUR COVER LETTER MUST NOT EXCEED ONE PAGE! Rubric on next page

Rubric

