Plant Tissues

Photosynthesis:
Performed by chlorophyll
Sunlight is absorbed by the leaves
Creates oxygen and glucose (carbohydrates)
Light energy + carbon dioxide + water = glucose + oxygen 

Glucose transported/stored as other carbohydrates like starch, which are used for cellular respiration 
Stomata allows gas exchange, open/close for carbon dioxide to go in and oxygen to go out 
Guard cells control stomata opening/closing. Open/closes to ensure proper gas exchange and reduce water loss
Water is moved to the leaves from roots via the xylem

Palisade layer = closely packed cells containing chloroplasts
Spongy mesophyll = loosely packed cells containing chloroplasts
Cuticle (transparent) = wax on upper/lower surfaces blocking water and gas diffusion 
Dermal tissue = protects plant organs from external environment, regulates gas exchange 
Ground tissue = some performing photosynthesis, other support plant body 
Vascular tissue = transporting water, nutrients, sugar throughout plant, also supports body 

Plant Tissue Systems

Root System 
Consists of all organs below ground 
Continuously grows outward to absorb more nutrients
Anchors plant 
Absorbs water+minerals from soil
Stores food
No leaves 
Usually grows below ground 
Root hairs protect from insects and increase surface area

Types of roots
Taproots/Fibrous roots

Shoot system
Consists of all organs above ground 
Performs photosynthesis and transports water, nutrients, and sugar
Structural support
Produces flowers 
Usually above ground 
Consists of leaves, stem, flowers/fruit
Leaves
Main Site of Photosynthesis
Contains chloroplasts, which contain chlorophyll that absorbs sunlight
Glucose used for cellular respiration, plant growth, and energy storage
Lower epidermis contain stomata for exchange of gasses
Opening/closing of stomata controlled by guard cells 
Stomata open when temperature is warm and there is a lot of water vapor

Mesophyll 
Middle layers between upper and lower epidermis
Palisade cells perform most of the photosynthesis in leaf
Contains many chloroplasts and are tightly packed together
Spongy mesophyll cells are loosely packed
Allow movement of gasses within leaf, contains chloroplasts 

Chloroplasts
Contains thylakoids 
Arranged in stacks called grana, used to capture light energy 

The Stem
Supports shoot system
Transports nutrients and water to leaves

Systems working together
Vascular bundles connect root and shoot systems together
Xylem moves water and minerals from roots to all parts of plant (1 direction, up, dead) 
Phloem moves sugars produced by photosynthesis to all parts of plant (2 directions, up/down, alive) 
Xylem does not use any of plants stored energy, phloem does

Moving water through the system
Water is needed to take up nutrients in the soil 
Nutrients need to be dissolved into water to be absorbed and taken up by the xylem 
Too much water in soil negatively affects plants
Soil with too much water leaves no space for oxygen

Moving through the roots
Root hairs (small extensions of the roots) increase surface area for nutrients/water to be transported into roots by osmosis 
Endodermis is found in root, helps control passage of water/minerals to xylem 
Endodermis is a waxy, waterproof substance directing water towards the xylem, preventing it from being trapped in endodermis cells 

Root Pressure
Root cells bring in minerals into the xylem, mineral concentration increases 
Higher mineral concentration leads to more water diffusing into xylem 
As water flows in, root pressure increases, pushes liquid up the xylem 

Transpiration
When water reaches the end of the xylem, it moves into the leaves 
Water at the leaves have 2 purposes
Use in photosynthesis
Evaporation through stomata when gas exchange occurs 
Take in carbon dioxide and release oxygen
As water evaporates, more water moves into spongy parenchyma/ mesophyll cells, pulling more water from xylem into leaves

Transporting water from root to leaves (paragraph)
Minerals dissolved into water, water is absorbed from soil to roots, then endodermis transports water to xylem. Adhesion, the property in which water sticks to the side of the xylem, prevents it from falling down. Cohesion, the property in which water molecules join together, helps maintain pressure in the water column. Root pressure (push) isn’t enough to move water to leaves. Transpiration (pull) is also needed. Transpiration and root pressure pushes and pulls the water up to the leaves. Due to the space created by water evaporating from the leaf, the water gets pulled to the empty space from the xylem (high concentration to low concentration). 

Photosynthesis (paragraph)
Photosynthesis is the process of how plants process water, sunlight and carbon dioxide and produce oxygen and sugar (glucose). In order for this to occur the 3 components need to be processed. For light, it must pass through the cuticle before it reaches the leaves of the plant. Once the sunlight passes through the cuticle the highly organized palisade tissue receives the sunlight in the leaves. Within these cells are a high concentration of chloroplasts. Inside the chloroplasts are sacs called thylakoids. These sacs contain chlorophyll which are responsible for trapping the sunlight. To ensure maximum surface area and absorption of sunlight, the thylakoids are stacked upon one another in the chloroplast. These stacked thylakoids are known as grana. In addition to light, water is also needed for photosynthesis to occur. The underside of leaves contain small openings called stomata. They are responsible for allowing water vapor to exit the plant, but also take in carbon dioxide for photosynthesis. In order to regulate the amount of substances entering/exiting the stomata, guard cells surround the stomata and act as gatekeepers to control the amount going in and out of the leaves. Once the carbon dioxide enters the stomata, it passes through the mesophyll (spongy) tissue. The cells in the mesophyll tissue are loosely organized so that the carbon dioxide can flow easily to the chloroplast so that photosynthesis can occur. This also allows the oxygen, produced through photosynthesis, to easily release into the environment. Once photosynthesis occurs, glucose and oxygen are produced. The sugar is sent throughout the plant via phloem to be used by other cells or stored in the roots. Therefore, vascular bundles play an important role in ensuring water and glucose are able to reach all of the cells in the plant. The combination and interworking of all these components allow the plant to conduct all the necessary processes needed to survive. 

Moving nutrients through systems
Glucose is produced during photosynthesis, and is combined with other molecules to form sucrose and other carbohydrates 
Sucrose is soluble in water, so it can move through the plant with phloem 
Extra unused sucrose is stored in roots and converted into starch 
If plants need to use stored starch, it must be converted back into sucrose because starch is insoluble in water. 
Starch cannot travel up the stem and reach the cells that need sugar 

Movement of sap
During spring, sap moves from roots up to buds so they can develop into mature leaves and conduct photosynthesis
During summer and fall, leaves produce plenty of glucose for cells, extra glucose is stored in roots as starch 

Xylem vs Phloem
Xylem 
Water and minerals
No end walls between cells 
One way only (up) 
Outer cells not alive 
Phloem 
Organic molecules 
End walls (sieve plates) 
Two way movement
Cells alive, need energy

