
Dreams
by Langston Hughes
Post-reading Questions:
Define barren.
	Barren, in this case meaning bleak and lifeless. 
In the first stanza what two things are compared? What kind of comparison is it? Imagine and list four ways these two things are similar.
The two things compared are life and a broken winged bird, if you let go of dreams. This can be related to each other because: 
1- Dreams are usually the fundamental ground for a will to live. When we let go of dreams and let them “die”, it’s like the bird has hit something and broken its wing; and because of that it cannot fly anymore, like how we have no will to go on anymore. 
2-  Life without dreams would be meaningless; broken wings no way to fly. 
3- As a bird with a broken wing, we are but a shell with no hopes of the future. 
4- Life is a broken winged bird, can basically be summarized to meaning that our dreams, our lives itself are very delicate. Any harm towards it could potentially break. We need to protect our dreams. 
In the second stanza what two things are compared? What kind of comparison is it? Imagine and list four ways these two things are similar.
The two that are compared are life and the barren field, if you let go of dreams. This can be related to each other because: 
1- When dreams are broken, most of the time your life seems absolutely meaningless, no motivation, nothing to look forward to. This can be compared to the barren field, lifeless and completely empty. 
2- Life is like a barren field. Unless you find something that stands out from the dead field, only then will you go chase it. If you don’t see anything worthwhile, what’s the point of moving anywhere? Just like you are frozen with snow. 
3- Even if dreams aren’t dead, if it lacks any purpose, they stand still, nowhere to go if there’s no purpose, frozen in snow in the barren field. 
4- With no motivation, a dream will just remain there without it actually getting put into action. Over time that dream fades, gets frozen, unable to move, no longer having any meaning. 
Which part (or parts) of the poem evoked the strongest reaction (positive or negative) in you? Why?
The second stanza. I never really thought about it before, but I have a lot of dreams that were never actually pursued. Now I realize because of this it has become meaningless to me. They were once important to me, but because I had no motivation to make it happen, I lost interest in it. Those dreams are now just like the barren field. 
What aspects of individual people’s experience (i.e. love, loneliness, joy, despair) and/or what aspects of social or group experience (racism, sexism, homophobia, violence, materialism) does the poem address? Explain. 
The poem addresses all emotions. Positive ones, and possibly due to social or group experiences, do they become negative emotions. We all now, or before, had dreams. They were positive things in our lives, a sign for us to have something to look forward and reach for. But due to social or group experiences, it can change our perspectives. As we grow older we start changing our minds on many things, as well as subconsciously giving up on dreams. Whether its because of a negative experience that leaves us sad, lonely, angry, or any of that, dreams that once had meaning to us might break in seconds. 
Langston Hughes was African American, and he wrote this poem before the Civil Rights movement in the United States resulted in legalizing equal rights for African Americans. Now what aspects of social or group experience (racism, sexism, homophobia, violence, materialism) does the poem address? Explain. 
It addresses group experience because in one of the stanzas, Langston Hughes says to hold onto dreams and if it dies, then you have no will to go on.

Identify the significance of the poem by naming the theme or main idea and give a supporting detail.

The main theme is  holding onto your dreams, don’t let anyone destroy or break your dreams. Your dreams are more valuable than you think.

Prewriting. Previously, you created a list of five items of personal significance and three of social significance. Now choose two items from those lists and for each create a comparison. (i.e. Friends are like a mountain). Choose something like an object (ship), geographical feature (sea), or animal (bear). Then for each, create a list of three ways that the two are similar. (i.e. Friends are like a mountain because….)
That person that shall not be named thats personally significant to me, is like video games, I think about both all day and I just want to play league all day, i think im addicted to league i need help anyway, im always happy when I see that person and im always happy when I play league (thats a lie) I don’t regret meeting that person at all and I don’t regret being introduced to league (thats also a lie)

The Road Not Taken
By Robert Frost

Define diverged and trodden. 
Diverge  is to split or go separate ways. Trodden is to walk
Describe what happens in this poem. What choice does the narrator make and why?
The poem talks about 2 roads that split. And the narrator takes the road less traveled because it looked just as fair
Does the narrator ever expect to return to this choice?  Why?
No because the poem says “I doubted if I should ever come back”
Explain these lines: “Though as for that the passing there/ Had worn them really about the same.”
They were both walked the same i think idk im confused i hate poetyry its so confuseing
Identify 2 lines or phrases that use imagery and the sense to which they appeal. Describe what each allows you to imagine.
Two roads diverged in a yellow wood, I can imagine 2 roads that split in a yellow wood.
Because it was grassy, I can imagine grass.
Identify 2 comparisons and the lines of the poem that use them.
There are no comparisons
Why does the narrator sigh?
 As we grow older we start changing our minds on many things, as well as subconsciously giving up on dreams. Whether its because of a negative experience that leaves us sad, lonely, angry, or any of that, dreams that once had meaning to us might break in seconds. 
 The poet chose to call this poem “The Road Not Taken” rather than “The Road Less Travelled.” How does this choice affect the poem’s meaning?
He sighs because he’s happy? Or a sigh of relaxation? Idk

Prewriting. Previously, you chose two symbols to represent two items you value. Now for each of those symbols, create five descriptions that appeal to the senses. Try to appeal to as many of the senses as possible. (i.e. The mountain top glowed orange in the setting sun.)

Two symbols I value might be water and a door. Water is free and flowy. I picture the ocean. It flows so freely with a cool atmosphere; nice and calm as if there are no worries. 




Richard Cory
by Edwin Arlington Robinson

The poem is about RIchard Cory, He had everything, riches, and he was adored so suicide was unexpected.

Imperially means he is kingly, array means impressive display, grace means nice

Rhyme, Rhythm, concenance

“One calm summer night” makes me immagine a calm summer night. “We people on the pavement looked at him” makes me imagine peasants looking upon a “king”.

“And he was always human when he talked” its a symbol. Human and talking is being compared. It means hes not a robot when he talks, he talks like a normal human.

Idk im confused

“Went home and put a bullet in his head” negative, I did not expect it.

Not everyone is happy even if they have everything.



Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening
by Robert Frost

Queer means odd or weird

Someone stops by the woods in the winter while its snowing on the darkest evening of the year

Its too snowy and dark to see anything so its better to just stop.

He needs to continue because he still has a long way to go. Last line is repeated to tell himself what he needs to do so he doesn’t stop.

I don’t understand what a line break is

Rhythm and rhym

The woods are lovely dark and deep
Between the woods and the frozen lake

Darkest evening of the year, darkest evening and year are being compared. 

He has promises to keep?

He has promises to keep, that means he is determined

Keep ur promises don’t break it. Determenination

Jabberwocky
By Lewis Carrol

Who speaks the words in quotations marks?
The father of the son
What happens in this poem? 
A son slays the Jabberwocky
The poem requires us to make inferences about the meaning of words the author has made up. Make an inference about the definition of brillig, slithy, vorpal, and frabjous.
Brillig: time during the day
Slithy: slimy, slippery
Vorpal: sharp and magical
Frabjous: fabulous
Identify 3 poetic devices like alliteration, assonance, consonance, rhyme, and rhythm.
Rhyme, rhythm and assonance
Identify 2 lines or phrases that use imagery and the sense to which they appeal. Describe what each allows you to imagine.
“  The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!” appeals to the vision: I can see a monster with a big mouth, sharp teeth and long claws.
“ The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame,” appeals to the vision also: I can see an enraged monster with hatred in its’ eyes
Analyze one line break in the poem. Explain why it does or does not follow each of the three line break conventions. 
Follows one of the three-line break conventions because it stops and completes a scene, before describing the next scenario of the son returning home. 
The poem seems to be based on a well-known style of story, which would make it a kind of allusion. 
What well known kind of story provides the basis for this poem? 
Allusion to hunting traditions where the head of the beast is taken home as a trophy
How might the entire poem be a metaphor?
It could be a metaphor about how the dangers of life that your parents warn you about can be overcome with courage
In what ways is the poem creative?
There are lots of nonsense words and the Jabberwocky itself is a creative creature
What meaningful experiences are represented in the poem?
Overcoming challenges/dangerous things 
Which part (or parts) of the poem evoked the strongest reaction (positive or negative) in you? Why?
The part where the boy slays the Jabberwocky evoked a strong positive reaction in me because it felt like it was describing a big, furious beast being slain by a boy.
Identify the significance of the poem by naming the theme or main idea and give a supporting detail. I think the themes of this poem are overcoming evil, the love between father and son, and courage. This is all drawn from the poem describing a father praising his son for courageously defeating a huge beast who seems to be seen as evil

Nothing Gold Can Stay 
Rhyming, and alliteration 
“Nature’s first green is gold, her hardest hue to hold.” An imagery that can be represented here is how nature holds something so valuable like gold, and although nature possesses this, it is very hard to maintain and keep for a long time. 
“Her early leaf’s a flower” can allow me to imagine a single daisy flower just blooming in the midst of a green grass field. 
Every line break is when there is a period. 
Gold and the flower. They are the same in a different metaphor. They are compared because gold represents something luxurious, new, and valuable. A flower represents a new birth, pretty, and peaceful. Later on in the poem it shows both of these symbols dying out or explaining how difficult it is to maintain, then dies, as the flower. 
It is a very creative perspective in my opinion. It opens a new way to describe basically how “nothing good lasts forever”, by using nature as the holder of “gold” and “a flower” can show how even the smallest good to the biggest great can all disappear.
An experience that can be represented here can be how we take advantage of the wonderful things we have. We don’t even realize it until it happens, but all the good we have in our lives will eventually come to an end, our existence proves that, because we’re all going to die one day. 
“Nothing gold can stay” Although this is the title of the poem, after actually reading it, the last line gave me a very big feeling of realization of the title. Reading how such wonderful things like the flower and gold can be in possession of nature’s grasp, it also has downfalls, which is how hard it is to keep. For gold it was described as “the hardest hue to hold” as it is very heavy and could drop at any moment, and for the flower it is said that it only lasts “only so an hour, then leaf subsides to leaf”, meaning even as small as an hour, the flower will die. It opened an interesting perspective for me.
It is basically saying how “nothing good lasts forever”, by using nature as the holder of “gold” and “a flower” can show how even the smallest good to the biggest great can all disappear. 








