













Fetal Pig Dissection Lab





Damian Wong
Ethan Lao
SBI3U
Grade 11 Biology
December 21, 2023
Mrs. Stella Tam

INTRODUCTION
Dissections help us better understand the organisms we encounter by allowing biologists to compare and contrast their differences. The dissection of a fetal pig offers an opportunity to observe firsthand the stages of organogenesis and gain insights into the remarkable similarities between pig and human development. Through examination of these specimens, this lab will uncover the foundational structures of life, exploring the intricate organ systems that support both prenatal and postnatal existence. This hands on exploration will deepen our understanding of embryology. Foster an appreciation for how different physiological systems are interconnected.


MATERIALS
*refer to textbook, p. 506. (Galbraith, 2001)

PROCEDURE
*refer to textbook, p. 506. (Galbraith, 2001)

RESULTS
*refer to diagrams and observation charts at the back

DISCUSSION
Pg. 508, #2
The fetal pig has a lot fewer teeth and a longer facial structure. Because the pig is still not developed, it is possible that the teeth have not fully developed yet, as they still rely on nutrients from the fallopian tube. The pig also has a longer facial structure, as it is adapted for rooting and digging. Human faces are flatter, and the lips are more developed for precise movements for speech.

Pg. 509, #4
Food will enter the mouth and be physically and chemically broken down into ingestible units
Food is guided by the epiglottis to enter the esophagus and into the stomach.
The stomach breaks down food through physical and chemical digestion into chyme, a thick liquid with nutrients in soluble units that can enter the bloodstream
Chyme then enters the first section of the small intestine, the duodenum, which absorbs the nutrients into the bloodstream.
After passing through the rest of the small intestine, the jejunum, and the ileum, the waste products are passed into the large intestine.
The large intestine absorbs 90% of the water back into the bloodstream, while the dried up waste products or feces, are stored in rectum
The feces are then released by the recutm. 

Pg. 511, #9
The respiratory system in our lungs helps us breathe in oxygen from the air we inhale and get rid of the carbon dioxide that our cells produce. The circulatory system uses blood vessels to transport oxygen from the lungs to parts of our body. It also carries carbon dioxide back to the lungs so that we can exhale it.

#10
In the process of digestion, the small intestine plays a role in breaking down and absorbing nutrients from the food we eat. The circulatory system, which consists of the heart and blood vessels, is responsible for distributing these nutrients throughout our body. Blood vessels found in the intestine, including capillaries, help with the absorption of nutrients. Once absorbed, these nutrients are transported through our bloodstream to cells and tissues, where they are used for energy, growth, and various bodily functions.

CONCLUSION
The hands on experience of conducting lab dissections has allowed for a personal witness to how different physiological systems work together to sustain life. As this lab delved into the details of organ systems, it provided an understanding of embryology and the incredible journey that life takes from conception to birth. By dissecting and studying organisms, this lab was able to bridge the gap between knowledge and practical application, greatly improving our comprehension. This lab not only expanded the similarities and differences between the human organ system and the pig organ system but also instilled a profound appreciation for the miracles of life and the shared biological processes.

REFERENCES
Galbraith, D. I. (2001). McGraw-Hill Ryerson Biology 11. McGraw-Hill Ryerson. 
