Euthanasia 

This is the act of intentionally ending someone's life in order to end someone’s pain and/or suffering. Usually people who are terminally sick or are experiencing too much pain to handle would participate in euthanasia. An alternate action rather than ending your life on purpose would be to continue doing a stronger treatment to treat the illness, or undergo a surgery in hopes of getting rid of whatever it is. Since some people can’t afford to receive surgeries and medication, they would think that euthanasia would be the only option for them. That is in fact not true and there is always a possibility of being put into a coma, it will not kill you but will make you unconscious so you won’t have to feel any pain. During that process if you die during your coma, at least you won’t be able to feel the pain within your last moments. This is why instead of euthanasia, a coma would be the better alternative to solve the pain someone might feel when they are really sick or suffering. But implementing this into the services who help with people with doubts on life like suicide hotline, as well as even the areas that allow ethanasia, it might be able to steer the person away from doing anything reckless. 
Stakeholders involved?
Abortion 

Abortion is a procedure that potentially ends a pregnancy/ kills the fetus if the person who is pregnant does not want the baby. People who are involved in this action would be pregnant women who have usually either gotten pregnant by accident, or just no longer want to give birth. Though abortion seems like the most rational decision in order to get rid of a baby, there are alternate methods instead of abortion, like giving birth and leaving the child up to adoption, or leaving the child to a trusted guardian to raise. Of course there are always other reasons as to why a woman doesn’t want the baby, such as the pain it’ll take to get through the birth, but the best option I think is best for an alternative instead of abortion would be to put the baby up for adoption. The outcome of this isn’t exactly the absolute best as abortion still should be a strong option, but if it was a top idea for the mother, it would work out fine. 


Tax evasion 

Tax evasion is when someone deliberately avoids paying their taxes to the government, and refuses to ever do it. Many varying people could have a reason to evade, such as bad power distribution among their government, low educational level in the population, and higher tax rates depending where you live. An would be to create a better structured tax administration organization, and lower the tax rates, reinforcing the economy. 
Stakeholders involved?
