Expository SFF Essay Self Evaluation 

For my self evaluation, I will talk about my brainstorming and writing process throughout the course of this essay. Starting off with brainstorming. A weakness I had during the writing process was that I am absolutely terrible at making intro sentences to the paragraphs, and specifically the thesis. When I first started to write my essay, I spent way too much time just sitting and brainstorming, so in order to help myself with a rough outlines of my topics, I had to use chat gpt, but I ONLY used it so I had a topic organizer so I my writing process could be smoother. Before I went on my trip, I wrote all the way to my thesis paragraph. As for my research section, I spent a good chunk of my time finding out which articles I could use to apply to the main topic of the essay, which was the 2 prompts, “How settlers and Indigenous people come together as one and move forward in harmony”. Initially I actually planned to write my essay in the first prompt, which was “How does systemic racism continue to affect people in Canada today”, but soon after writing almost half of it, I was overthinking and felt like I had a better argument with the second prompt. So even if it was impulsive and probably not a good idea, I switched the topic. After rewriting everything, I started my very first draft, which was extremely hard for me because I had a really bad case of writer's block. Nothing could come out of my head, and I procrastinated for a very long time. On top of that, I’m not usually the best at starting paragraphs or essays for some reason, so thinking up an idea whilst going through writer's block was very difficult. When I eventually started writing through my first draft essay, I tried to apply as much information from the book into my writing, as well as trying to convey my point as smoothly as possible. After finishing my first draft, I reread and polished my grammar up a little before sending my essay to Daniel for peer editing. When Daniel edited my essay, it was extremely brutal for me because he helped me realize that I had a lot of holes and unorganized topics in my essay. Because of this I had to completely rewrite some sections of my writing and double check if my sources were correct. Even if Daniel’s peer editing was kind of brutal; I think he helped me the most during this entire process. One more weakness I had was that my mind was really unorganized while I was writing this essay. I'm not sure why this was the case, but while re-reading my essay, I realized how my ideas were all over the place. In the future, I need to do more brainstorming and think through what I'm writing before I write it. Now if I'm discussing my strengths, I have to be completely honest and say that I don't think I had any strengths that stood out. I could definitely write this essay better and I really need to organize my thoughts on the topic.