Secretary's Report 

The regular meeting of the People Christian Academy student council was called to order by president Ethan Shewan at 7:42 am on February 6, 2023. 
Ethan gave the Student Council report. He talked about:

Support night for missions team:
Feb 23, 6:45- 8pm
Maybe 1-3 sc members will help set up everything before the night begins  

A non uniform day for missions team 

Ski Trip
Horse Shoe Resort on the 28th
101 people coming 
Logistics
Bring board games to the chalet for students who don't always want to ski or tube all day
All students will wait in their homerooms in the morning, with their homeroom teachers, then start loading the bus 

Community Service Events
More Service Runs
Hanna will do the announcement next Monday to notify everyone 
Meet up next Friday for an information meeting and to see who will come to the service run 
Supposed date: March 3rd 
	⁃	Are we gonna give out roses?

Last Minute SS Field Trip:
April 13th there will be a field trip for all of SS outside of the school 
Possibly in Ashton meadows and play some games
SC will provide burgers etc. 

30 Hour Famine
March 30th 
Should assign tasks for different people
Will find specific rooms to separate boys and girls during sleeping hour

Intramural
	⁃	Next Event: - 
Posters have been made for each house will, will put them up on the bulletin later this week. 
	⁃	House Captain Meeting
Will move tuck shop from thursday for friday due to intramurals every week 
A motion was made by Hanna Viljoen to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Marley Shum and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry.
Whichever team wears the most house shirts their scores will be doubled (??)


Prom
For more info check SC 2022-2023: Spring Formal (Prom)

Possible movie night next week like last time 
Misia will take point on it 

Spirit Week 
Last week before march break 
We need to find the themes for everyday (brainstorm!!)

Possible other filler events within the gap of events already planned
	⁃	Minute to win it again (??)
	⁃	Friday afternoon block

Meeting was adjourned at 8:19am.


