Financial literacy 

Money skill 
To manage money well, people actually need to learn…
How to think critically about financial opportunities
How to persevere and solve problems 
How to save 
How to understand the ethical implications of financial decision 
How to make achievable S.M.A.R.T goals 
How to collaborate with others to reach financial goals 

Key terms: vocabulary 

Wage vs salary: Salary is a fixed amount of money given to an employee over a year, and wage is the hourly amount of money paid to an employee for every hour of work. 
Gross income: Total amount of money that you make before taxes 
Net income: The money you make after all the deductions 
Deductions: Anything that is taken out of your income (usually provincial and federal reasons)
EI contributions: (Employment insurance) If you are working and are suddenly not working anymore, as long as you’ve been paying your taxes you can claim EI.  
CPP contributions: (Canadian pension plan) 
Expenses: Anything you spend your money on that you need or want outside of work (phone bill, data plan, phone, toys, games, etc.) 
Loan: When you borrow money from someone with the intention of paying them back (plus interest).
Interest: 

Budget essentials 

Income: money you receive 
From work
From “side-hustle” 
From investments
From interest
 As gifts 
Expenses: Money you spend 
Things you need 
Things you want 
Paying debts 

I.e Savings, mortgage/rent, credit cards, utilities, food, gas, other.


Income and savings 

Taxable 
money you make from jobs, side jobs
Reported to CRA

Non-taxable
Money you get from gifts, lottery 
Not reported to CRA 

Also taxable
Interest 
RRSP (registered retirement savings plan) 
RESP (registered education savings plan) 

Non-taxable
TFSA (tax free savings account) 

Loans 
Borrowing money from a financial institution (bank, corporation, government, etc.) 
Types: short term, long term, student, mortgage, credit card, financing 
Interest: fees charged on loans a percentage of the amount borrowed/owed
Fixed interest: unchanging interest
Variable interest: changing/ floating interest 
Compound interest: interest on interest 

What is compound interest? Compound interest is interest calculated on the initial principal, which also takes into account all of the accumulated interest of previous periods of a deposit or loan. 

Questions to Ask Yourself 
How long will I be keeping the money in my account? 
How often will I want to withdraw money? 
How much money do I estimate keeping in the account? 
TSFA (Will need to wait until 18) 

Factors to consider 
Monthly fee? 
Transaction fees? 
Online banking? 
Reporting feels? 
Interest rate? 
NSF charges? 
Transfer fees?
Financial Literacy Exploration 
Practical money skills canada
Savings options 
Debit cards

What does it mean to live within my means? 
Rainy day funds? 
Needs vs wants

Building Your Own Budget

INCOME examples 
wages/salary
Money from side hustle 
Gifts 
Scholarships, grants, and bursaries 
Money from an RESP
Interest from investments
Loans
When making payments labeled as expense 

Expense Examples
 
Housing 
Rent, mortgage
Utilities 
Food 
Groceries, eating out, meal plan 
Essentials 
Medication, toiletries, clothing
School needs 
Tuition and student fees 
Books, supplies, lab fees, etc. 
Transportation 
Transit
Car payment, insurance fees 
Extras 
Movie tickets, travel, etc. 

Money management tips 

Build in some wiggle room into your budget by rounding your expenses up (to the nearest dollar, $5, $10) 
Bee self- disciplined 
Be goal oriented 
Don't spend everything you make 
Consider setting aside money for donation, tithes, etc. 
Keep track of your income and spending 
Use cash, check your banking app regularly, use a budget 
Be smart with interest: 
Pay high interest loans first and low interest loans last 
Earn more interest than you spend 

GTA or far away? 
Sources of income? PT job?
Post-secondary life expenses?
Current average costs? 



