Secretary's Report 

The regular meeting of the People Christian Academy student council was called to order by president Ethan Shewan at 7:38 am on January 9, 2023. 
Ethan gave the Student Council report. He talked about:

Financial situation: Enoch will go through all the numbers, to be determined 

Fundraisers
Coffee house/talent show?
Possible entry fee of $5
50% of the money will go to missions team (Misia will ask Mr. Mcdonald on proposition)  
 A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Enoch Chiu and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry.

Pizza days in semester 2
Will need to distribute the sem 2 pizza forms soon 
Instead of one sc member and Mr. Radder, will add an additional sc member to help out and increase the speed of distribution of pizza (Ethan will sort out the schedules)
 A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Jesse Garas) and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry.

Discussed how to add pop cans as an option along with the new sem 2 pizza forms
Experimental atm 
For the soda, an additional 75 cents for that option 
Will have a variety of flavours, first come first serve
 A motion was made by Ethan Shewan  to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Gabriel Xu and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry.

Ski Trip
 Possible Location: Horseshoe Resort, still waiting on other options such as Lakeridge etc, no motion has been made to be definite yet
Possible Dates and Times: 21, 27, 28; tbd
Price
Range between $40-50, if you choose the skiing/ snowboarding rentals with tubing
Transportation fees (bus)
Tbd, but those who live closer to the resort may have the option to drive there themselves



Community Service Events
More Service Runs

40 Hour Famine
General date sometime in March
A lot to plan considering people will be staying over in the school 

Intramural
We have house captains now and half the year has gone by already
Choose an event to start: Dodgeball 
Signups will start this week, event will start the following week 
If you come with your shirt you gain 10 points, if you win you get 100 points 
- An idea to keep interest throughout the school year is a multiplier that increases per event like (1.1 to 1.2 to 1.3 etc) (??)
Marley will ask the team captains for help 

The meeting was adjourned at 8:20 pm.

