Secretary's Report 

The regular meeting of the People Christian Academy student council was called to order by president Ethan Shewan at 7:35 am on January 16, 2023. 
Ethan gave the Student Council report. He talked about:

Student Council January 15th Plan

Coffee house/talent show

Will need to discuss the date of when to hold the coffee house with Mr. Mcdonald

Semester 2 Pizza Days

We should announce when the forms will be released 
Make sure we have an extra person on pizza from now on 
Will probably hand out the pizza forms within this week, maybe around today to pep wednesday 

Regarding pop -> Sell for 75 cents a can during pizza
We will add an option onto the pizza form if they want a side of soda, and list the varieties of flavors so when they receive their pizza, they’ll be able to choose whatever they want 
A PA announcement will be made for student reps from each homeroom to come over during lunch and receive the forms to distribute to their classes. 

Ski Trip

Decided on Horseshoe Resort, because no other place responded lol 
	⁃	Dates: 28th 
	⁃	Price: $40-50 plus bus
	⁃	Probably get out the forms within this week or next week before exams 

Community Service Events
More Service Runs

Next event will be after exams around late February, will also hand out forms around then too 
Might hand out roses since it's around valentines day?? 
Max 25 people this time 
Potential dates and teachers involved: TBD



30 Hour Famine
Just a general date: might be better to have it around right before march break 
It’s a very big event, so planning has to start now 
Important topics include breakfast plans, “renting” out the school for the night, room assignments, boys and girls separated, world vision volunteer to come over, juice supply, big screen presentation (?) 

Intramural

Dodgeball has been decided for this friday during lunch 
Points breakdown:
	100 Points for the win and 10 points if you bring your shirt
An idea to keep interest throughout the school year is a multiplier that increases per event so like (1.1 to 1.2 to 1.3 etc) 
A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Jesse Garas and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry.
We should make a poster to post that can keep track of all the points
If we have the gym space available and enough dodgeballs will be confirmed soon
Mr. Radder will print a hardcopy of the signup form and hang it near the gym instead of posting it online, so more people will take notice of it. 
For each round/game, 10 mins max, then rotate 
Might use a tv or projector screen to live release the points of each round, we’ll decide later 
This week, Ethan and Mr. Radder will ref 

Meeting was adjourned at 8:18am.
