Benefits of exercise

Increases energy
Generally, the more you move the more energized you feel. This leads to increased muscle strength and endurance. 

Sharpens focus
Promotes clearer thinking. Mental focus has been known to improve 2-3 hours after exercise
Lowers chance of developing Alzheimer's disease. 

Enhances mood 
Endorphins and serotonin helps improve memory and mood. Exercise has been known to be a natural antidepressant drug.

Helps control impulsive behaviour
After exercising, the brain is better able to sort priorities and stay on task, while ignoring distractions.

Improves memory 
The brain is better able to retain and recall information after exercise. 

Increases productivity
Exercising midday helps improve time management skills and one’s efficiency and effectiveness. 

Does physical activity make you smarter?

Although there is a positive correlation between exercise and intelligence. The relationship IS NOT causation. 

Physical activity helps a person better realize their potential. However, in order to gain maximum effectiveness, research shows that the activity has to be…
Willful
Mindful
Fun
Consistent
Opportune


Inactivity

15% of Canadian adults meet the physical target of 150 minutes of moderate to vigorous exercise per week.
7% of children 5-17 get the recommended 1 hour of exercise per day. 
14% of 5 year olds meet the 1 hr of exercise per day 
3.5% of teenagers get 1hr of exercise per day 

**Between ages 5 to teenagers, the percentage of meeting daily physical activity declines. 

Cost of inactivity 

Creates patterns and habits that plague multiple generations of canadians. 
Reduced life expectancy 
Increase in cardiovascular disease 
Children are about 15% less fit than their parents were at their age. 
Not all diseases can be eliminated by being active, but the severity and incidence of many common diseases can be significantly reduced. 
Healthcare costs
A lot of healthcare spending is directed to illnesses related to inactivity 
Taxpayers are spending $6.8 billion a year 
$2.4 billion in direct health care costs 
%4.3 billion from lost economic output due to illnesses, injuries, and premature death due to physical inactivity. 

Barriers to Physical Activities 

Environmental 
The places we live in encourage Passive transportation (cars and public transit) vs. Active transportation (walking and biking)
Lack of bike paths, sidewalks, poor street lighting, and safety issues encourage passive transportation communities.

Socioeconomic
Family income can prevent people from enjoying the benefits of sports and physical activity. 
1 in 3 families can't afford to send their kids to extracurricular sports or recreation activities 

Cultural 
Studies show that new immigrants to canada find it hard to access fitness information and opportunities available in a new country
Changing rules in sports and activities that accommodate cultural beliefs without increasing the risk of players playing the sport.

Personal and psychological
Lack of time
Lack of energy
 Poor diet 
No access
Fear of pain and physical exertion
Self-esteem 
Financial constraints 
lack of motivation

The study of kinesiology and its benefits

‘Kinein’ is the green term “to move” and “-ology” means to study. Therefore, Kinesiology is “the study of movement” but has become more focused on human movements.
Kinesiology looks at how bioscientific and sociocultural areas affect human movement.
Bioscientific (ex. Biomechanics, energy systems, anatomy, and physiology)
Anatomy focuses on the structure
Physiology focuses on how those structure work together 
For example: torn achilles 
Anatomy => Achilles tendon, ankle, calf muscle
Physiology => Ankle move up which activates the achilles to pull on the calf muscle to engage and flex

Sociocultural 
Impact of politics, economics, race, and gender on human movement 

Kinesiology is also known as “exercise science, human kinetics, physical education, sport science” 
Depending on the post secondary institution, certain topics may be more emphasized and focused upon. 
**READ THE PROGRAM DESCRIPTION CAREFULLY 

 
