Unit #1: Society, Physical, Activity, and Sport 

Being physically active was not for leisure in early human history, it was for the sake of survival and it took a significant amount of energy and time.
Hunting and gathering 
Moving from place to place to find food and shelter 
Engaging in warfare

As technology advances, we now have “leisure” time for physical activity for the sake of enjoyment, self-improvement, and health benefits.  

Ancient Greeks

The first to emphasize physical activity can improve our physical and mental well-being.
This belief led to the formation of sporting events, which eventually became the “olympic games”
The first event was a 600m race. Later, wrestling, discus, boxing, javelin, and long jump were added.

When the olympic games were held, a month long “Olympic Peace” would be implemented where athletes would be able to safely travel to the city of Olympia to compete without fear of attack by enemies. This principle is still used today.

Romans & Middle Ages

The Romans embraced and built upon the Greek model of physical and mental well being by incorporating physical fitness to a young man’s education.
The coined the term, “a sound mind in a health boyd” (mens sana in corpora sans - latin)
They evolved and favoured more brutal games, which led to the gladiator sport, where slaves, prisoners, and christians, would fight to the death. 
Depending on how well the opponents fought, the crowd would signal whether the loser would live or die. 
When the roman empire began to fall, athleticism declined and the olympic game disappeared 
In the middle ages, knights and noblemen emphasized horseback riding, sword fighting, and jousting as part of their training. 
Holiday activities like wrestling, dancing, and early forms of soccer were played during the middle ages. 


Renaissance 

As Greek and Roman culture resurfaced due to the unearthing of artifacts, society admired the athleticism of the sculptures and it began to share the social ideas of athleticism.
This belief led to the resurgence of being proactive in developing the body and mind through physical activity. 
During this time, new sports and games were invented/evolved and this continues to this day. 
For example: today, spikeball, ultimate frisbee, teqball, tag, dance, skateboarding. 

Industrial Revolution 

As the middle class emerged in society, this provided more opportunities for everyone to enjoy and partake in sport, not just the elite and upper class. 
Because people had long working hours in the middle and lower class, games like cricket, football, and tennis were structured with set rules and time limits to accommodate busy work schedules. 
Sports venues were built to allow the middle class spaces to enjoy sports due to them not owning large fields or land for sports to be enjoyed. 
Today, we have public parks and community centres with courts, pools, weight rooms, etc. 

Victorian Era 

Amateurism was a principle where an individual would play sport for recreation and not as a professional. 
During this time, the “victorian ideal” was developed and it emphasized that an amateur athlete would be a gentleman who displays sportsmanship and fair play. These 2 ideals were believed to be more important than winning. 
This era believed that these sportsmanship and fair play should hold true in sport as well as in every aspect of one's daily life. 
It was believed that some sports were not appropriate for women because they would be considered “manly” so calisthenics (gymnastics-type exercises set to music) and undemanding activities were created and deemed appropriate for women. 
Regardless, the victoria era believed sport “built character” and was again an important part of a young man's education. 



Today 

Sport and society have direct links, today, we;ve evolved and adapted from our historical ancestors where boundaries and stigmas have been torn down. Physical activities are not only made for the elite and privileged 
New ideas are emphasized like “personal best”, while older ones are still maintained like sportsmanship and fair play 
Science has shown us the health benefits of physical activity, which has played a role in shaping our education system and social values.
In Canada, we are so multicultural and games from other cultures are introduced to celebrate and appreciate differences and heritages. 

Professional sports and competition 

Professional sports began with athletes working additional jobs that were unrelated to sports to provide for themselves and their family. 
Teams eventually decided to pay their athletes to retain them full time and motivate them. 

The landscape of professional sports grew because of higher wages, higher standard of living, more leisure time, and the invention of television; which increased broadcasting. 
In professional sport, you have athletes and owners. Athletes live primarily through sports, while owners of teams operate as a business, owners are concerned with profits and losses. 
As professional sports developed different sports leagues formed to increase competition, popularity and profits. 
As certain sports continue to grow, additional “sports franchise” are included 
For example: 1995-1996 toronto raptors and vancouver grizzlies joined the NBA, but the grizzlies moved to memphis in 2001 due to losing profits. 

Women’s gains in physical activity and sport 

Women had to fight against the idea of “feminine” sports during the 19th and earth 20th century. 
It was believed that certain sports and exercises had negative effects on women including…
Bearing children, weakness in bones, menstrual problems, creating “unattractive” muscles

Division between male and female types of sports is practically non-existent, but there is still a disparity in terms of the amount of coverage there is. This is primarily due to viewership and interest. 
“Title IX” was a piece of legislation in the US that gave girls and women access to the same physical education and sport opportunities that men had. 
Women’s sports and competition has grown immensely. I.e. WNBA, WTA, LPGA, has increased in coverage and fans. 
Women’s world cup and the olympics have equal coverage for both men and women. 

Government initiatives to promote active, healthy living 

GPA (daily physical activity): Ontario government created this policy which requires school boards to ensure all elementary students have a minimum of 20 minutes of sustained moderate to vigorous physical activity each day during instructional time. 
ParticipATION was created in 1971 because the government discovered that only 5% of the population exercised enough to gain health benefits. Its goal was to urge Canadians to incorporate some form of activity into their daily lives.
It ran an advertisement that a 60 year old Swedish woman was more physically fit than a 30 year old canadian! 

“Own the podium” (2005): non-profit organization that supports potential medal winning athletes with additional finances and programming to help them succeed. 
This program helped Canada win more winter olympic medals. (Canada ranks 5th in the world). 

Chapter #3: business, physical activity, and sport 

The relationship between business, physical activity, and sport can be challenging. The following factors impact the relationship between these 3 areas. 
Economics (transfer of wealth) 
Finance (managing large amount of money) 
Marketing
Consumerism
Mass entertainment 
Professional sports are just big businesses in our society. Like all businesses, they are trying to be more profitable over time. 

Professional vs. amateur athletes 

The main difference between professional and amateur athletes is that professionals are paid to compete. 
You may notice there are many athletes in the olympics. Majority of them are not famous. Although they may be competing at the highest level, they may not be paid to play and train during their regular routine. 
The olympics is a way for many athletes to gain exposure and potential sponsorships so they can become “professional”
For example: “bandit running” created “the unsponsored project” for the 2024 olympics. 
Bandit running dresses athletes in all black attired without logos, to support unsponsored athletes so that they may get sponsored by large companies and become “pros”. 
Professional athletes not only get paid by team owners or sponsorships, but endorsement deals are another source of income. 
Endorsements involve an athlete promoting a product and/or service that has no relevance to the athlete’s training or performance. 
Although Canada has an “athlete assistance program” which qualified individuals receive $4,500 to $18,000 a year to cover living expenses and training, most have to work side jobs to make up the difference.
QUALIFYING REQUIREMENTS INCLUDE: 
Top 16 in the world of your event OR seen as someone who has the potential to reach this ranking

This helps athletes in less popular sports to further reach their potential and grow the sport as well as canada;s credibility in it. 

Sports for profit 

A big way athletes make a lot of money in the NBA, NHL, MLB, or NFL is due to revenue streams 
Ticket sales
Merchandise 
Media advertisements during games, on uniforms, etc.
Media coverage contracts (who is licensed to broadcast the games?)
Winning is crucial. Teams that do not have a history of winning or underperform decrease their yearly revenue. As expenses increase each year, revenue needs to keep up. 
Teams that have a loyal fan base or a large market; which usually have a long history, can be slightly more forgiving even if the team loses. (i.e. toronto maple leafs and the new york kicks). 

Brands also partner with sports to be official providers for equipment, uniforms, etc. 
Pro athletes get lucrative deals where endorsements and sponsorships and pay significantly more than their team glory:
Lionel messi 
Contract with inter miami = $51 million over 2.5 years 
Ownership in the club (inter miami) + image rights (apple, adidas, etc.) = $125-150 million 
Stephen curry - rejecting nike 
