Chapter 5: Anatomical Position
The anatomical position is the starting position where you begin to describe the body’s anatomical and physiology features, positions, and movements.
3 diagram rules:
The person is upright and standing with their head, eyes, and toes pointing forward
Feet are together and arms are slightly to the side
Forearms are supinated (palms of the hands are facing forward

Lines:

Midline: The vertical line that divides your body symmetrically.
Anterior/Posterior: Anterior is the front surfaces of the body, while posterior is the back surfaces. These can also be used in relation to other structures. For example, the heart is posterior to the sternum, while the sternum is anterior to the heart
Superior/Inferior: Superior refers to heading towards the head, while inferior is heading away from the head. 
Medial/Lateral: Medial means towards the midline, while lateral is away from the midline
Proximal/Distal: Proximal towards the point of attachment of the limb to the body, distal is farther away from attachment. For example: the elbow is proximal to the wrist, the knee is proximal to the ankle, the toes are distal to the ankle, the fingers are distal to the shoulder. 
Superficial/Deep: Superficial means on or close to the surface of the body, while deep means farther away from the surface. For example, a scrape on the knee is likely superficial, while a cracked rib would be deep. 

See pg. 119, Fig. 5.1


Chapter 5: Anatomical Planes

Anatomical Planes - Refer to positions in space
3 planes
Frontal Plane: Separates the front and back of the body
Transverse Plane: Separates the top and bottom of the body
Sagittal Plane: Separates the left and right side of the body

See pg. 121. Fig, 5.2

Chapter 5: Anatomical Axes
Anatomical Axes - Describe the movement of the body or joint

3 Axes
Frontal Axis - Intersection of the Sagittal and Frontal Plane
Sagittal Axis - Intersection of the Sagittal and Transverse Plane
Vertical Axis - Intersection of the Sagittal and Frontal Plane


Homework: Memorize the terms and get a good grasp of these combinations




Chapter 5: Joint Movements

Flexion/Extension: Flexion is bending at the joint, and extension is straightening
Abduction/Adduction - Abduction is moving body segments away from your body (i.e. lifting your arms), while adduction is moving them closer to the body. (i.e. bring your arms to your side
Supination/Pronation - Supination is rotating the wrist so your palms face forward, and pronation is rotation where your palms face downward.
Plantar Flexion, Dorsiflexion - Plantar flexion moves the ankle joint like when your stand on your tiptoes, and dorsiflexion moves your ankle so your toes move closer to your shin
Inversion/Eversion - Inversion is when your stand on the outer edge of your foot (i.e. rolled ankle). And eversion is standing on the inner edge of your foot.
External rotation/Internal rotation - External rotations twist or turn away from the midline, and internal rotation moves towards the midline. 
Circumduction - movement in a circular pattern that involves flexion, extension, abduction, and adduction. 
Elevation/Depression - Elevation movement that goes upwards, and depression is movement that goes downwards
Protraction/Retraction - Protraction moving forward (i.e. chin out), retraction moving backwards (i.e. squeeze shoulders back
Opposition/Reposition - opposition is when the thumb comes into contact with another finger, and reposition is when the thumb goes back to it’s resting position

Chapter 5: Human Skeleton
Made up of 206 bones, but at birth, there are more than 300
As you grow bones fuse together (i.e. skull of a newborn baby) resulting in 206 bones. 
Many parts of the body are made up of several bones joined together (Radius and Ulna)
Male vs. Female Skeleton
Males have thicker and longer legs and arms
Females have a wider pelvis to facilitate the birth process
The skeleton supports the body and works with muscles to cause movement, while also providing protection (i.e. Skull, Rib Cage, Vertebral Column)

5 Main Functions of the Skeletal System
Structural System
Support for soft tissue
Protection
Protective cage for vital organs
Growth Centre for Cells
RBC and platelets are made in bones
Reservoir of Minerals
Calcium and phosphorus can be tapped when the body needs it.
Movement
Muscles attach to bones by tendons. Muscles contract and bones move.

Bone Composition
Calcium Carbonate and Calcium Phosphate
60-70% of bone weight
Provides msot of the bone’s stiffness and resistance to pressing or squeezing forces
Calcium deficiency results in having more brittle and breakable bones (increases with age)
Collagen (Protein)
Give bone flexibility
Helps to resist pulling and stretching forces
Collagen is lost progressively as you age making bones weak and brittle

Water 
Bones contain less water compared to other organs

The 5 types of bones
Long bones
Found in arms and legs (Ex. Femur and Humerus), any bone whose length greatly exceeds its diameter
Flat Bones
Flat, thin, and protect vital organs (ex. Ribs, Sternum, Clavicle, Scapula)
Irregular Bones
Odd looking bones in face and vertebrae
Sesamoid Bones
Oval shaped bones. Found in tendons (ex. Patella in knee)
Short bones
Commonly found in wrists; good shock absorber

Structure of the Skeleton
The purpose of the skeleton is to protect body organs and act as a supoprting framework
The bones making up our skeleton are living tissues complete with blood supply and nerves
The Skeletal System (206 Bones) is divided into the following area…
Axial Skeleton (80 Bones)
Mainly made up of vertebral column (the spine), most of the skull, and the rib cage
Protection examples: Cranium (Brain), Stacked Vertebrae (Spinal Cord), 12 Pairs of Ribs (Lungs and Heart)
Appendicular Skeleton (126 Bones)
Refers to the movable limbs and their supporting structures
6 Major Regions
Pectoral Girdle (4 bones): Left and right clavicles and scapulae
Arms and Forearms (6 bones): Left and Right humerus, radius, and ulna
Hands (54 Bones): Left and right carpals, metacarpals, and phalanges
Pelvis (2 Bones): Left and right hip bones
Thighs and Legs (8 bones): Left and right femur, patella, tibia, and fibula
Feet and ankles (52 bones): Left and right tarsals, metatarsals, and phalanges

Long bone structure
Cartilage 
Allows smooth movement within joints and protects the ends of bones

Medullary cavity
The inside shaft of the bone
Filed with red and yellow bone marrow
Red bone marrow makes red blood cells and yellow marrow is made of adipose (fat) cells.

Compact Bone
The dense part of the bone that provides structural integrity
Low porosity and collagen, but high mineral content
Les flexible and stiffer. Better at resisting stress.

Cancellous bone (spongy bone)
Filed with marrow in small cavities
High porosity and collagen, but low mineral content
Not as stress resistant. Provides more flexibility and shock absorption (i.e. vertebrae)

Epiphyseal plates and lines
These plates are known as growth plates and are found at different location in epiphyses
Epiphyseal lines occur when the growth plates come together and fuse. Once this occurs, no growth will happen. 

The long bone is divided into 2 main sections:
Epiphysis 
Makes up both ends of the long bone.
Cartilage, cancellous bone, and compact bone can be found here

Diaphysis:
Makes up the middle of the long bone 
Medullary cavity and compact bone can be found here

Effect of fitness on bone 
Bones become denser and more mineralized when subjected to regular physical activity and habitual loads
For benefits, loads should exceed the bones normal accustomed load. 
Inactivity has the opposite effect, leading to decrease in bone density and strength 

Bone formation
Ossification (building new bones)
Compact bone
Osteoblasts produce osteoid which help form hardened material known as bone

Cancelous bone 
Osteoblasts produce osteoid which forms a bundle of fibres

Bone remodeling (replacing bones) 
Osteoclasts
Release acids and enzymes to remove old bone

Osteoblasts
Deposits new bone tissues. 
Bones can be repaired, but usually a cast or splint is used so that the bones can reattach properly and avoid potential complication 

Fractures: known as “breaks” and are divided into 3 types depending on the severity of the break.
Simple: when there is a break or crack in the bone, but no separation of the bone into parts
Sometimes known as “hairline fracture” or “grenstick fracture”

Compound:
When the bone breaks into separate pieces. Usually occurs from a major blow. 
Sometimes known as “transverse fracture”

Comminuted: 
When the break results in bones being shattered into many pieces. This might occur in a major car accident. 

Bone injuries and bone disease 
Symptoms of fractures include
Sharp pain
Tenderness
Sweling 
Discolouration of the skin 
Grating or grinding movement

Stress fracture:
When muscles are too fatigue to absorb the impact of the activity, these shocks are transferred to the bone causing tiny cracks in the bone. 

Shin splints:
Painful condition that happens in the tibia due to overuse and inadequate recovery time. 

Aging:
Osteoporosis: the degeneration of bone mass and deterioration of bone tissues which causes fragility and increases risks of bone fractures. 
Common areas: hip,swine,wrist
“Silent disease” because people don't know they have it until a sudden fall or bump that causes a fracture, revealing the bones weakness.
No cure for osteoporosis
Preventative measures.
Balanced diet rich in calcium and vitamin D 
Weight bearing exercises
Healthy lifestyle (no smoking or executive alcohol
Bone density testing and medication 

Remodeling: 
Declines from the fourth decade onwards
Bone remodeling reverses - reabsorption occurs to prevent too much bone los
5-10% bone mass loss per decade.




Different types of human joints 

Joints are where bones connect with one another. They are held together by connective tissue and ligaments to ensure stability of the joint. 
They play an important role in movement
They are sites of great stress and can be common places of injury 
Articular system: the areas where joints and surrounding tissues connect so that movement is possible

3 main types of joints 
Fibrous joints: 
Tightly noun together and allow no movement. 
Ex. sutures of the skull. 
Cartilaginous joints: 
Bones that connect to one another by cartilage and have limited movement
Ex. “discs” in the spinal column. Hard outer ring and soft core, which allows movement, but also protects against intense jolts like landing on your feet
Synovial Joints: 
Joints that allow the most movement (usually the ones that come to mind)
Ex. knee, shoulder, or ankle 

Types of synovial joints 
6 types of synovial joints
Joints are categorized based on how many axes they can move in 
Uni-axial (1), bi-axial (2), tri-axial (3)
Ball and socket joints 
The “ball” at one bone fits into the “socket” of another 
Most maneuverable joint that allows movement in all 3 axes. (ex. Hip and shoulder)
Gliding joints
Flat or slightly curved bone surfaces slide against one another (ex. foot) 
Hinge Joints 
A convex portion of one bone fits into a concave portion of another
They allow movement in one plane (ex. plane) 
Pivot joints 
A rounded point of one bone fits into a groove of another
Allows rotation in one plane (ex. Head - signaling no)
Saddle joints
Allows movement in two planes (ex. thumb) 
Ellipsoid joints 
Allows movement in two planes (ex. wrist) 




Characteristics of joints
Articular cartilage 
Found at the end of bones that connect with one another
Allows smooth contact between the surfaces as they move
Joint capsule
Bag like outer-structure that protects the structures within
Lined with a synovial membrane that allows nutrients to pass into the point. 
Joint cavity 
The space between the bones of a synovial joint
Filled with synovial fluid that acts as a lubricant and provides nutrients to the articular cartilage 
Fibrous capsule
Prevents synovial fluid from leaking out
Bursae 
Small fluid filled sacs at friction points between tendons, ligaments, and bones
Intrinsic ligament 
Think bands that help reinforce the joint capsule
Extrinsic ligament
Support the joint and connect the articulating bones of the joints
Prevents dislocation during normal movement 

Joint wear and tear

Osteoarthritis
When the articular cartilage at the end of bones is gone due to heavy usage and the surface of bones begin to erode. 
Joint pain, stiffness, and reduced mobility occurs.
Joints are not as able to absorb shock which can lead to fractures and injuries 
It is an irreversible condition 
Treatments include pain medication and joint replacement (i.e. knees and hips) 
Bursitis 
Inflammation of the bursae because of friction between tendons, ligaments, and bones
Sprains 
When ligaments are stressed to its threshold they will stretch minimally, but more often they will tear 
Sprains occur when these ligaments are overstretched. 
They are classified using a grading scale to determine severity
1st degree:
A few ligaments are stretched. Minimal swelling and some pain
2nd degree:
Partially torn ligament fibres. Damage and swelling is wide spread with considerable pain
3rd degree:
	The entire ligaments completely or near to completely torn, surgery is an option to reattach a ligament to the bone. 
Sprain treatment 
Treatment in the first 24-48 hour is critical 
Follow P.I.E.R or Rest.Ice.Compression.Elevate 
Pressure: wrap the area to reduce swelling, but not so tightly that it prevents circulation
Ice: ice the injured area to reduce the swelling, do not ice the injury directly. Use a cloth as a barrier to avoid damage to the skin. 
Elevate: try to get your injured body part higher than your heart, if possible 
Rest: activities need to stop until the healing has progressed to where you can gradually start using the injured body part. 
Dislocation
When a bone is displaced or “pops out” from its joint. 
Often are caused by collisions or falls, and are common in fingers and shoulder joints. ]
Usually only a trained professional can successfully put it back into place
Symptoms: 
Significant pain and inability to move the appendage from its current place
Numbness or no feeling in the appendage
Unusual square appearance of the joint area or visibly noticeable lack of bone in the joint area. 
Separation 
Unlike a dislocation, the joint in a separation is intact
The ligaments that attach to the bone into place are torn which causes separation
For example: a shoulder separation is caused when the ligaments attached to your collarbone (clavicle) to your shoulder blade (scapula) are torn. 
Collisions or an awkward fall can cause the bones to separate 
Separation is classified using a grading scale form I to IV depending on the severity and position of the injured bone
Symptoms:
Pain at the end of the bone or over the joint
Swelling and an obvious lump where the joint has been disrupted
Pain when moving

Pg. 161 #3,4,5,9,11,13,21


