Bradbury & the Bible
Misia Lui 12B 

Biblical reference: Book of Job (Bradbury, 89)
"Far away across town in the night, the faintest whisper of a turned page, "The Book of Job."”

	Bradbury includes many excerpts from the Bible in Fahrenheit 451. One being the Book of Job. There isn't a specific verse that is referenced within Fahrenheit 451, rather it was when Faber offered to read to Montag that he took out his Bible and went to the book of Job. The reason why Job was mentioned specifically in this section of Fahrenheit 451 is because this is when Montag goes through a similar situation that Job had experienced in the Bible. In the book of Job, Job is constantly being thrown around by misfortunes around him, causing him to slowly lose everything he once had. The test God had put Job in was for him to understand his relationship with God and to challenge his faith. Through every single hardship, Job never insulted God once or blamed Him; instead, he grew closer to the Lord through this situation. This is a relation towards Montag in Fahrenheit 451, because while introducing the book of Job, Montag and Faber had decided to make Montag wear a ‘green bullet’ in his ear which acted as a secret communication between the two of them. This was especially helpful in the moment so Faber could guide Montag in what he says to other firemen, as well as allow Faber to understand the inside culture of general firemen as well. Montag is constantly surrounded by his coworkers and peers who conform to common beliefs in this world, meaning that if the ‘bullet’ were to be found out, he could get murdered. Montag had to push through despite the risks and consequences and continue to trust in what Faber would tell him to do; just like Job had to trust God through every single hardship Satan would throw at him. 

In Job 38: 2-3, it says: “Who is this who darkens counsel By words without knowledge? Now prepare yourself like a man; I will question you, and you shall answer Me.”

This Bible verse can be related back to Guy Montag as he is a fireman burning books and houses without a care in the world. Montag did not truly understand the world, or his own actions (that is until Clarisse). “By words without knowledge” is a very powerful statement in the book of Job which can be used as a big theme throughout Fahrenheit 451. Most people in this society do not think whatsoever; they do not socialize nor stop to think, and are constantly shoved with bright technology. While following Montag, we can begin to see him understand his lifestyle, himself, and the world around him, which leads to his eventual rebellion against society for what should be right. God had wanted Job to feel the same way. Job did not fully understand the ministry he had with the Lord, which is why He used a period of Satan’s doings to allow him to grow and understand where he stood with God. In the end, God gave so much more to Job than what he started with, and hopefully it will be the same for Montag.