 The History of English Bible Translation  - Battle for the Bible – The English Bible  
Learning Goals
describe the key figures in the English Bible translation (Wycliffe, Tyndale, Cranmer) 
understand the differences between Protestant and Catholic view of the Bible
appreciate the sacrifices made by those who love the Bible 
Please watch the video and answer the following questions.  You may need to pause the video to help you answer the questions.

Why did authorities not want the Bible translated into English? 

They wanted control (latin) and they did not want people who only knew english to understand. They would question the authority of the church. 

When did the English Bible first appear? 

 1380s.

What was at the heart of the Roman Catholic faith? 

Mass was at the heart of the Roman Catholic faith. Bread and wine were served. 

What did this ritual mean for the Roman Catholic Church?  What language was spoken?  

The ritual was meant for salvation by taking mass. The language spoken was latin. 

What did John Wycliffe believe to be central to the church?   What language did they translate the English from and how did they do this?

John Wycliffe believed that the bible was central to the church. They translated the bible in latin from english.  


In 1407, the  Wycliffe English Bible was declared illegal.  What did possessing an English Bible now mean? 

The English bible possessed heresy, meaning death. 

What did the church do to the corpse of John Wycliffe?  

They dug his body up, burned it and threw away the ashes. 

 William Tyndale was a remarkable linguist.  Why did Tyndale hate the ban on the English Bible?
He felt it created an unnecessary barrier between the believers and God. 
  In Oxford, Tyndale began teaching others from the Greek translation (1515).  Throughout Europe a revolution was taking place.  What was this movement called and who was instigating this in Germany?  What was the main issue causing this reformation? 
This movement, the reformation, and it was about how you are saved,it was led by Martin Luther. 
 What documents did Tyndale use to translate the Bible into English?  What year was his copy completed? 
Greek, Latin, German, hebrew. His copies were completer in 1325-1536P

  Tyndale was the first to translate the Bible from the original languages.  What kind of style did Tyndale use for translating the Bible to English?  What are some examples of words he used to give a different view of the Bible from the Roman Catholic view?
Direct people’s language, he used the term “charity” to “love”, and “eldur” as “priest”, ans well as “church”. 
 How did Tyndale’s English Bible enter the country? 
Black market boats, they hid the items in books. 
 What happened to Tyndale after he was arrested? What were his final words? 
Tyndale was arrested, then shipped to England to set him up and confined. His final words were “open the king of England's eyes”. The king, as in Henry the 8th. 
What did Thomas Cranmer authorize for English churches and why did he do this? 
He authorized the first official English bible, the Matthew bible. 
Who are the Puritans and what Bible did they prefer? 
Puritans: reform the Cof England, did not want bishops/ priests.  The Bible they preferred was the “Geneva Bible”. 
What is the Protestant belief about the Bible compared to the Catholic? 
Protestants believed that scripture alone we as the reader were the ones to interpret the text, while catholics believed that the church, the bishops, and rome should interpret the bible. 

