




Conformity: Examining this Impact on Decision-Making Processes



Misia Lui
Peoples Christian Academy
HSP3U: Intro To Anthropology, Psychology & Sociology
Miss Priscilla Byon (Kim)
May 6, 2024



Abstract
 
Conformity, by definition means compliance with standards, rules, or laws; and the behavior in accordance with socially accepted conventions or standards. Everyone has a small voice in their heads that yearns to be accepted and acknowledged by others, whether they admit it or not. Due to this, sometimes people may try to match the “energy”, opinions, and sometimes even personalities of others in order to feel accepted by the community around them. This report explores the multifaceted relationship between decision-making processes, conformity, and a desire to conform to group norms and behaviours. Through an analysis of real-life research and documented theories, it examines the factors contributing to conformity, such as group dynamics and individual habits, as well as the cognitive and psychological mechanisms underlying its influence on decision-making. This report will partially analyze conformity on decision quality, exploring first hand experiments through jellybeans on how conformity varies between individuals based on personality, surroundings influences, and time limited response times. 

Introduction 
	
People usually conform their behavior to match others around them due to two primary motivations: informational conformity, which occurs when individuals lack knowledge or experience about a situation and look to others for guidance on appropriate thoughts and actions; and normative conformity, stemming from the desire to be accepted by a group, avoid social rejection, gain approval, and maintain a positive self-concept by adjusting to the expectations and norms of those around them in order to fit in and be viewed favorably (Milgram, n.d.). The central question surrounding this topic is asking why people conform their behaviours to match others in the first place. Further research explores how conformity shapes the powerful tendency for individuals to align their attitudes, behaviors, and especially opinions, with those of the surrounding majority (Conformity, n.d.). Conformity can also be neurologically linked to how a brain works, which therefore affects the outer behaviourisms of the person who is conforming; this can potentially permanently alter someone’s mindset (The Neuroscience of Social Conformity: Implications for Fundamental and Applied Research, 2015). 
The environment surrounding a person is what triggers conformity to arise in the first place, whether it be in larger or smaller groups, an environment which includes specific individuals that are connected to a person, or even taking a situation-based approach,  can make all the difference on how one would handle a situation that creates an opening for conformity (Buist, n.d.) . 
The report is meant to shed more light on reasons why people tend to conform, putting into account environmental and situational factors that can push an individual to move into such a direction. The objective is to prove if people tend to copy actions from their peers around them because they would rather blend in to the majority, rather than being an outlier.


Methods

The central experiment revolving around the hypothesis of conformity was created through a group-like “game”. The game focused on a large jar filled with jelly beans, and groups of people guessing how many single pieces were in it (4 people at a time). The catch of this game was that they were all asked to estimate the amount of candy in the jar individually first, then after, would have them all group together and analyze it together before sharing their answers at the same time. The actual amount of jellybeans inside the jar was 578, and of the four participants in each group sample, three of them were asked to lie about their answer and say an obscure number within the 600’s. These three were also asked to not change this answer no matter what. The remaining one participant was simply told to say their original answer, without letting them know that every other participant had fabricated their answer. After speaking to each subject separately, all participants were gathered together and asked to analyze the jar, also pointing out that you can change your original answer if one desires; this point was made in order to not raise suspicion with the participant that did not know the rest would lie anyway. Soon after, all participants were asked to say what their final answer was one by one, and the outlier would always be asked to say their answer last, in order for them to increase the chance of conformity after hearing everyone else’s odd numbers. 
The objective of this experiment was to see in what circumstances a person would be more likely to conform. The base structure of the jelly bean game was already an easy gateway to possible conformity, but adding on smaller details like putting different main test subjects in varying environments such as with their friends or with people they aren’t as familiar with, creates all the more difference on how the person may react; this was a test to see how that would work. The general nature of the main participant was also put into account, since it is assumed that not all people are usually swayed by their environments, due to how their personality is structured. Finally, the time span of one game was relatively fast (around 5-7 minutes max), which was intended in the first place in order for there to be no time to over analyze or think too much into the game; it forces the target subject to use their first instinct to decide on an ultimate answer. After the experiment is over, it is then revealed to the oblivious participant that the game was set up in order to test conformity. Considering there are many possible factors one would conform, asking the question of why they conformed or not was presented to the subject, in order to get a clear understanding of their actions. 

Full experiment outline and results: Misia Lui - Checkpoint 3: Experiment/Survey Completed and Analysis





Results

The results of the jelly bean game experiment were different than expected. In the original hypothesis, it was theorized that most people are prone to conformity during an experiment such as this, and the reason would be because they would rather blend in to the majority rather than being an outlier. After all rounds of experimenting, the final results were that only 33% of people conformed, and 67% of people did NOT conform. Despite the fake numbers that 3 of the 4 members were asked to make up, plus a constant clarification that it was okay to change answers, the main subjects within this sample size’s experiments were not likely to conform.

In order to understand why, a separate verbal survey was conducted after the experiment had ended. 
Among the participants who did not conform, the question of why they did so was asked. Of the 6 main test subjects, 4 did not conform; and of the 4, 3 of them all said they did not conform because even though they knew their answer was further from everyone else’s and it was probably wrong, they were not afraid to be incorrect and decided to embrace the answer they initially stuck to. The one outlier of the group who did not conform expressed how they did not change their answer because they thought that everyone else was wrong, and their answer was the correct one. The ratio of these two answers were 25% to 75%. 
Among the participants who did conform, the same question of why they did so was asked. Only 2 test subjects of the 6 conformed in this experiment. One answered that they conformed because everyone’s answer was much higher than theirs, which meant that if the majority believed that it was a higher number, the correct answer is more likely to be of a higher number. The other test subject explained that they conformed because they did not want to draw attention to themselves if their answer was significantly different, and would rather blend in to a similar number answer. The ratio of these answers were 50% to 50% (due to super small sample size).

Experiment Results Chart: 					










No Conformity Question Chart:
				
Yes Conformity Question Chart:
				

Analysis

	After looking through the results of this experiment, there is one similarity among every answer for their reason of no conformity/conformity: self-esteem. Of the participants who did not conform, all were very sure and confident of their answer, no matter if they were right or wrong; and ultimately this stems towards the nature of their personality as a person, as well as their surroundings. Test group 1,2, and 3 were all groups of people who were familiar with each other, which probably gave them a sense of a safe zone with no judgment. On the other hand, test group 5 were a group of people who were not familiar with each other at all, and had probably never interacted until that moment. The fact that the main test subject of that group still did not conform shifts the belief that this person was not afraid to be different, despite not having any safety net like the other three test groups. Looking at simply the nature of this person’s personality and mindset, not conforming stems from their strong self-assurance that ultimately makes them resistant to social influence. 
	Of the participants who did conform, their self-esteem levels were definitely lower than the groups who did not conform. Both answers are quite similar to each other, as the element of conforming to the others’ answers were present. It is understandable that one may feel the need to conform, as it is more convenient, and avoids judgment from others. The test group that conformed since everyone else’s answer was higher, consisted of people who knew of each other, but were not close and practically strangers. A reason the main test subject conformed would be likely that they did not want to make a bad impression on the others, and while it is important to be confident in your answer, if the majority of people have a higher similar answer, it is natural that they would want to fit that answer. The other test group that chose to conform to blend in, this group consisted of people who were prior friends. The main test subject of this test group had a personality that was more prone to following the crowd, and naturally did not want to attract that much attention. Certainly this person would choose to conform in the moment so that their answer would seem to be an outlier, and while blending in, would be grouped with everyone else. This usually gives an individual a sense of social identity. 
One important element that was incorporated into this experiment was that each round was relatively quick. A fast paced, time limited answer period forces the main test subject to answer on natural instincts without thinking too much into it. Whether the individual conformed or not represents how they are as a person in their core.  During a period like group/social interactions, how a person responds to their surroundings is very crucial to understanding how they are as a person regarding their personality, self-esteem, and overall mindset. 
 
The central question of this report was to answer why people conform their behaviour to match others around them. Through this experiment, it is learned that people who conform their answers/ behaviours are doing this in order to make a good impression, and blend in to be socially accepted. The results of this experiment are important to note because it is a glimpse into real life examples on how conformity can take place in anyone’s lives. The way people react to situations like the jelly bean game, reflect on how one would react to social settings normally, and shed light on inner beliefs. 


Conclusion 

While the experiment provided valuable insights, there were some notable limitations that should be addressed in future research. The relatively small sample size of 6 sample groups (24 participants) may not be representative of the broader population, limiting the generality of the findings. Additionally, relying solely on self-reported data can be vulnerable to biases, and the lack of prior research in this conformity made it challenging to build a strong theoretical foundation. To better investigate the research question, follow-up experiments could include replicating the study with a larger and more diverse sample to establish the strength of the all results, and conducting a longitudinal study to track potential changes over time. 
A question that rises at the end of all experiments is if all findings relate to or interact with other relevant psychological constructs or theories. Conformity is so broad that it can definitely connect to so many other fields psychologically and socially. 
	


References

(n.d.). Why We Conform. Retrieved March 27, 2024, from https://www.psychologytoday.com/ca/basics/conformity
(n.d.). The Many Varieties of Conformity. Retrieved March 27, 2024, from https://opentextbc.ca/socialpsychology/chapter/the-many-varieties-of-conformity/
(n.d.). The neuroscience of social conformity: implications for fundamental and applied research. Retrieved March 27, 2024, from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4585332/
Group Conformity. (n.d.). Wikipedia. Retrieved March 27, 2024, from https://thedecisionlab.com/reference-guide/psychology/group-conformity



