Information For You 								05/11/22
Misia Lui 9B

Pg 157 #3-#7 

Organizations for each category (Written, electronic, people): 

A pamphlet on the Toronto Youth Wind Orchestra (TYWO)
TYWO website on how to submit an audition for every existing section
A librarian from Toronto Public Library 












Flow Chart 1 

Identify the cake pop book I will need: “Cake Pops - Tips, tricks, and recipes for more than 40 irresistible mini treats” By: Angie Dudley





Open the book to the first few pages. 






Find the table of contents page and look for the style of cake pop that I want. Then use that to help me get to the desired page. 





The cake pop style I want is called “Strawberry patch pops”, and by using the contents page it tells me it’s on page 77, so I go to that page. 





I use a highlighter to highlight all ingredients that are most important to buy, then write it down on a small notepad. 





After writing down ingredients, buy the ingredients and come back to look at the instructions to make the cake pop and start. 

Flow Chart 2 

Identify the website: TYWO





Search up “TYWO” and click on the link: (http://tywo.ca/)  






Use the search bar on the top left to assist me and search “how to join”, then click on the first result.





Use the first link in results from the search bar and scroll down until you find “Audition requirements” and “Video requirements”.





Read through all the instructions and type it down into my notes app for future use (when it’s time to practice and record the audition piece). 





Use instructions to choose which orchestra section and piece you will be playing, then record video and see how to send it to TYWO. 


Flow Chart 3

Identify the library: Toronto Public Library 





Get into the library and find the reception desk. 






Find help by asking the librarian at the reception desk how to get a library card. 






The librarian guides me through a process regarding forms and identification in order to obtain a library card. 





I fill out the forms regarding identification and private information and hand it to the librarian. 





After processing a little while, I receive my library card and am reading to check out books. 


Online screenshot for flow chart #3










Recorded conversation for flow chart #2 

Me: Hi, I was just wondering how I could get a library card? I want to check out some books.

Librarian: So in full procedure, in order to get a library card I will have to see two pieces of identification, and you will have to fill out this information page that includes your address, name and age, and other personal information. Then I will be able to process a library card for you no problem :) If you aren't comfortable with writing a physical form you can fill it out online where u can fill it out anytime anywhere and then you can just wait a little while until it gets approved. Then you can come back to this location and pick it up. 

Me: Ah okay, I'll just write down the information on a physical copy right now. 

Librarian: Okay. 

*after filling out everything and waiting for everything to be processed* 

Librarian: Okay! All done. Here’s your library card. In about a year or so you will have to renew your card if you want to continue using it, there is a fee to renew your card, the last time I checked it was around $3.

Me: Got it, thank you so much. 

Librarian: No problem. 
















Pg. 157 #7

The last time I had to gather information was during the interview assignment for learning strategies class. I had to interview three people and their positions in school, as well as their role, etc. I wasn’t particularly dissatisfied, but looking back compared to this trial, it wouldn’t be as effective as the 6 step system now. The reason for this is because with the three interviews, I only asked the questions itself while not adding into the topics more and overall just graphing the 6 step procedure. The six step system is more thorough in my opinion, it goes through each individual step better than just making questions then asking them. In conclusion I think the six-step system is the more efficient out of the two. 
