Name:Misia Lui 10B

Date:_feb 10, 2023
paragraph Response

Success criteria: I will write a thoughtful paragraph illustrating ideas from the book on a deeper level.

Instructions:
Using the paragraph note, write a detailed and thoughtful response to the following question: “How has Liesel's character developed through part 2 of the story? What imagery and evidence from the text help communicate this ‘transformation?’” (10 marks)

Throughout part one of the book “Book Thief”, we are introduced to the main character of the story who is a 9 year old (10 after) girl, Liesel Meminger. Comparing Liesel’s character attributes from part 1 and part 2, there are a few noticeable elements that may suggest that an even bigger development will happen to her in the future. 
In part 1, Liesel had just lost her brother due to tuberculosis, as well as her mother who had to leave her to foster parents due to her declining health. So much had been piled up inside Liesel so quickly that it is very expected that within just a few chapters she would have ended up feeling overwhelmed and mourn for the losses of her family, instead of keeping it all inside. 
Originally, Liesel is a very shy and reserved person, which is normal considering she had just moved to a completely new area with entirely new people. During part 1, it is evident that Liesel is at the beginning of her adjustment to her new life, as well as coping with her past experiences. One important element that should be put in the spotlight is the fact that she could barely read and write at all; and Liesel’s foster father, Hans Gruberman assisted her by teaching her the basics slowly. Transitioning to part two of the book, Liesel is seen to be adjusting more to life in Molching (Germany), as well as her school life. During this section of Liesel’s life, Hitler’s presence is more visible towards her as the Hitler Youth School is holding a parade to honour Hitler. This is where Liesel starts to link the fact that Hitler has something to do with the disappearance of her real parents. Due to this event, she starts to develop a growing hatred to Hitler, and voices this opinion to her foster father out in public; which is something that is not suggested to say out loud. This is significant to Liesel’s character development because now, she is becoming more open with her thoughts and trying to seek out the source of her grief to her family, which is very different to the Liesel in part 1. As part 2 progresses, it is pointed out that Liesel can now read basic books and write at a slightly moderate level; this is a very big improvement all thanks to Hans. Symbolism to signify that Liesel’s character is growing is how she wasn’t able open up and keep everything inside in part 1, which was when she also wasn’t able to read and write. In part 2, Liesel is able to read and write remarkably better, and this connects to her character because now she is more comfortable in her environment and getting used to her new foster parents, meaning she is more open about her opinions now. 
This is the evidence and symbolism as to why it is very noticeable how Liesel’s character developed through part 2 from part 1. 

