Persons Case Descriptive Essay ISP

The emotion of anger and the sound of teapots pouring tea into glass cups filled the room of Emily Murphy's home. "I have called all of you here today to discuss an urgent matter, and I would like the four of you to help me with it." Thus, The Famous Five was formed to fight against this misogynistic event created by the government. (“The 'Persons' Case — Famou5”)
	August 27th, 1927. Emily Murphy, an adult educator for women's rights (McMahon and Sharpe pg.), called Nellie McClung, Irene Parlby, Louise McKinney, and Henrietta Muir Edwards to band together as women's rights activists. Women were given the right to vote in federal elections in 1918. It started like this when the first woman was elected into the House of Commons the following year. Despite this, the position of the Senate still needed to be opened to women. Emily rubbed her temples angrily, eyes closed, and sat anxiously. The matter at hand was simple yet impossible at the same time. The four women, alongside Emily, pondered in thought about how they would go about their first action in resolving this situation effectively. 
	They put their teacups down and decided to sign a letter to the Supreme Court in which they asked the following: "Is power vested in the Governor-General in Council of Canada, or the Parliament of Canada, or either of them, to appoint a female to the Senate of Canada?" and "Is it constitutionally possible for the Parliament of Canada under the provisions of the British North America Act, or otherwise, to make provision for the appointment of a female to the Senate of Canada?" (Patterson and Mennie). Though the Famous Five knew that many letters regarding this matter were sent by others daily, this gave the women a sense of hopeful expectancy, as this would be one step closer to figuring everything out.
	…

The envelope paper brushed against Emily's fingertips as she flipped open the envelope of response from the one and only Minister Ernest Lapoint. 
The contents of the letter answered why Women were not eligible to run for Senate, and that was due to Section 24 of the BNA act that states that "The Governor General shall from Time to Time, in the Queen's Name, by Instrument under the Great Seal of Canada, summon qualified Persons to the Senate..". The government believed that women were not allowed to run for this specific position because women were not considered as 'persons/people,' at least under the law. 
	Anger turned to fury. 
	The women spoke amongst themselves, exasperated, discussing that the term 'persons/people' should be limited to men and women as well because otherwise, 'persons' wouldn't have made sense if it was just another terminology for men (Marshall). To their dismay, the Supreme Court of Canada had had this case brought to their attention, which they quickly decided to reject. A deep void in their chests spread like spilt ink on a table from their seeming defeat. This dent in their plan wasn't enough to stop their efforts, though, as they eventually moved on to try and find higher efforts in getting this case approved somehow. 
	Fury turned to building optimism.
	Footsteps approached the building of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London, also known as one of the highest courts in the land during this period. As they handed in their proposal to the court, anxiousness crept behind their positive attitudes as they waited for the result. 
1929, two years later. 
Emily Murphy rushes to find the other four women to eagerly tell them the good news: the British Privy Council passed their request, stating that women were indeed persons under the law and were eligible to be appointed to the Senate.



 
	

	
	
	


  
	