	
Concept of Physical Fitness
In my opinion, I think I am right in the middle, maybe leaning a little more to the side of physically fit than to unfit. I say this because recently, outside of manic mondays, I do home workouts every other day, and have been doing so since winter break. I think this has greatly helped my physical body and has also put my mind into perspective on how to be healthy and keep a good physical body as well. Another reason as to why I think I could say I am becoming more physically fit is how I’ve been able to execute daily routines and exercises much better and faster than before. Before, my body would’ve felt heavy just on its own, and as the exercising i’ve been doing has increased, I have found that my body is more light on my feet, which helps to do daily tasks easier. A last reason as to why I think I am more physically fit now is because I am waking up earlier, without being extremely tired, and sometimes am able to eat breakfast on a daily basis (which I don’t usually do). It was also known that having breakfast everyday can greatly help your energy and your health as well, and after eating breakfast more, I find that I can be more awake in the day.
	I chose these factors in order to determine if I am physically fit or not because they all describe how I’ve built my stamina and strength, and the differences between when I was less physically fit and now when I’m more physically fit. Many of the components that prove I am more physically fit include a clear improvement of endurance to routines used on a daily basis. 
	After doing research, physical fitness is defined as how your body works together in order to function during the day doing daily activities, and still have time to fully enjoy sports, run errands, do chores, etc. This has changed my perspective on physical fitness slightly as I have now also learned that not only does being physically fit mean being able to do daily routines easily with more energy, but it also means that even after all that, you can still have enough energy to other things you may want to enjoy to the best of your ability, and without feeling tired. 


















Fitness Data




Fitness Data Analysis

My 2 fitness goals when I had first started manic monday was to be able to run at least 10 laps, and to do one station and all of its exercises without problems.
The station which I think is my greatest strength was legs, and that was because since I was little I have been to many extracurriculars such as dancing and martial arts, and all of them required many many hours of drilling that was focused on my leg strength. My greatest weakness was running, and that was because I never had good stamina. Whenever I started running I would end up losing all my energy and power within the first 1-3 laps. 
I think the station I improved the most at was the running stage. I say this because as I had explained before, my stamina runs out extremely fast and running was the station I was worst at. During the weeks, I went from 6 laps to 10 laps, which in my opinion is a dramatic improvement.
The station I was most proud of was the core station, because around early december, I started to do small workouts at home with my parents on my own account, and most of the sets were core based. I applied this strength to the core station during manic monday and by the time of the last few weeks, I was able to do the exercises at school much better. 
1 practical strategy that I will continue to commit to even beyond gym class would be to do a 1 min plank from time to time, as well as try to run around the neighborhood when I have time in order to maintain the distance I can run. Even small exercises like these can be very effective if done very frequently, which is something I plan to do. 