Global Flood?  (4.00-13.25min) Phd Steven Austin, Geologist 
The rock and buildups of the towers of ground in canyons all over the world would be actually formed from liquid if it we dated back far enough in its history
During the great flood, the entire surface of the earth was covered in water, and when the flood retreated in the new water basins, the continents may have uplifted and lifted the arc to where it landed in the middle east. 
After the flood, an insane amount of water is trapped in an area, but once the dam that trapped the water broke, the water broke out in gigantic streams, carving the rocks which made the canyons. 
In some formations of rock, there is clear indication of tapeats sandstone on top and granite at the bottom which creates what is called to be the great unconformity. It is so obviously separated from the two minerals because it is speculated that it is because of the magnitude of flood flow from the global flood.  

What is in the original Hebrew text? (18.04 -23.36min) Phd Steven Boyd, Hebraist 
Genesis in the original text mentions Noah and the global flood 
In Genesis 1:2, it is said that there was a big ball of water in space in which God used to fill the earth.
It explains how it was when Noah’s children grew up and went into separate nations, which was then how different languages were formed. 
If Jesus is descended from Adam, and Adam was created on the 6th day of creation, then the earth can’t be that old. 

The Bones (50.26-55.35min)  Arthur Chadwick, Phd Taphonomist
The site that was visited in this section of the video probably holds the largest collection of bones in the world; all the animals included could range from 5-10,000 types.
When looking for fossils and bones, it is said that the bigger bones are usually found at the bottom of a layered surface, while the smaller bones are at the top. The reason behind this might be because of a catastrophic emplacement during the time when the carcass was rotting. 
There are no transitional fossils, rather the fossils that are found stay the same in the fossil records, they remain unchanged even through bone form. 
God only is the only solution to the creation of all living things. Saying that humans and animals were formed through evolution in nature has some holes due to the fact there is no evidence of any changes and nobody has witnessed the change in species. 

The Concept of Time (1.21.31-1.28min) Danny Faulkner, Phd Astronomist 
Before clocks and watches existed, people used the stars to tell the time of day ranging to every day to every year. 
If the moon were to be a little smaller or a little closer to us, eclipses wouldn’t happen and it would be irrelevant. The fact that everything was placed just right to be able to appear once in a while means that it doesn't just happen for no reason.
It could be possible that at the day of creating plants and land, the process of that would look like a plant growing, but instead of waiting days to weeks, it would only take a matter of minutes for everything to fully flourish. 
The big bang probably could not have happened due to the fact that it wouldn’t line up to the actual timeline of how God created things. 