/ 12 marks                    Know What You Believe Chapter One Study Questions 
Created by Dr. Alexander Philip 
For homework, you will be required to read all of chapter one of Know What You Believe. After reading the chapter, answer the following questions: 

1. Why was the Bible written? (2)
The Bible was written for the purpose of spreading the gospel, specifically the miracles and stories that the people from this era haven’t witnessed. In order to spread the word of God the Bible was written so even if people weren’t there to see it themselves, we can read what happened, thanks to the people who DID witness it and wrote it down, which is now known as the Bible. 
      2. When people say that “the Bible is inspired,” what do they mean? (2) 
When people say that the Bible is inspired, it doesn’t mean inspired in the way Shakespeare was inspired, it means that the prophets that helped writ e the Bible were inspired by the wonders of God’s works, therefore basically guiding the prophets to write exactly what should be written.
3. God has revealed Himself in two ways: God’s general revelation and God’s special revelation. Based on the book, what is involved in God’s general revelation and what is involved in God’s special revelation? (2) 
Jesus Christ was God’s fullest and clearest revelation. His special revelation is that Jesus was God incarnate. He sent his son down to this earth to save us from our sins. His general revelation is Nature and the entire cosmos, Through history God has revealed himself, and The words of the prophets were also instruments of God’s revelation. 
4. The Bible consists of two sections: The Old Testament and the New Testament. What is a “testament” in this context? (2) 
Testament means “covenant”, an alliance between two partners, an “agreement”, a “promise”. 
5. How did the following languages contribute to the writing and distribution of the Bible: Hebrew, Greek and Latin. (2)
Hebrew: All of the old testament was written in Hebrew. 
Greek: Jesus was born into a Hebrew culture in which the spoken language was a “common” form of Hebrew called Aramaic and a “common” form of Greek called Koine. So the New Testament was written by Jewish people, which was largely common in Greek. 
Latin: With the spread of Christianity to Rome, the Latin Vulgate version was translated around A.D. 400. So that became the authorized version of the Catholic church. 
6. What is one further question you have about the Bible from reading the chapter?  (1)
The section in this chapter where it talks about how the Bible is inspired, I find it interesting how it says that God superintendent the writers of the Scripture that what they wrote was what He wanted them to write. I know that God is a powerful being and creator of everything, but as much as he creates every human, how is it that the prophets knew EXACTLY what God wanted them to write? Did the Holy Spirit go through them and just guide them through the process? 
7. What is one question you have about the Bible in general? (1) 
If God is all-knowing of the future and controls everything about it, why did he let Satan/Lucifer to exist if he knew that he was going to be the devil and the main evil that spread in this world? Did he intend for this to happen? If he wanted a pure world, why did this happen? 


