Diversity Summative Presentations ENG2D

DIVERSITY: The concept of diversity encompasses acceptance and respect. It means understanding that each individual is unique and recognizing our differences. These can be along the dimensions of race, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, socio-economic status, age, physical abilities, religious beliefs, political beliefs, or other ideologies. It explores these differences in a safe, joyous, and nurturing environment. It is about understanding each other and moving beyond simple tolerance to embracing and celebrating the rich dimensions of diversity contained within each individual.

THIS IS AN INDIVIDUAL ASSIGNMENT
Based on the novel Dear Martin by Nic Stone, choose ONE dimension of diversity that best relates to the story:
Race
Ethnicity
Gender
Sexual orientation
Socioeconomic status
Age
Physical ability
Religious beliefs
Political beliefs 
Mental ability 

Find TWO news articles that highlight at least one aspect of the dimension (such as bias, inclusion, acceptance, tolerance, intolerance, violence, etc.)
The news articles must be from 2019- present.
They must be from credible sources (i.e., mainstream media).
They MUST BE CANADIAN

Research ONE change in Canada in the past few years related to your dimension that makes these articles important. (i.e., new laws? The shift in public acceptance? Support from politicians?)

PART 1: 
Research Notes:	
Use a minimum of THREE CREDIBLE sources which includes Dear Martin by Nic Stone. (i.e., at least two for your news articles, plus one more for the change in society). You may use more than three sources. 
Write research notes for each source. 
Must be in point form. 
Use a separate page for each one.
Must have bibliographic information at the top. (*Library templates are recommended. 

PART 2: 
Oral Presentation -  

Length - approximately 10 minutes.

What to include in your presentation:

Thesis Statement: 
Write a thesis statement for your topic.
This is what you want to PROVE in your presentation. 
It will explain why your topic is an excellent example of the need to recognize diversity. 

Chosen Articles:
Summarize each article
Explain the context and source of each article
Explain the aspect of the dimension (i.e., acceptance, bias, tolerance, violence, etc.).
Briefly relate this aspect of diversity to the novel

Change in Society:
What has changed (for better or worse) about this dimension?

Personal Insight:
What did you learn about diversity? 
What most surprised you when you were researching this topic? 
How has your perspective on diversity changed? 








SEE RUBRIC NEXT PAGE










Diversity Presentation 












