Topic: Was the US justified in dropping the atomic bombs?

There is a very controversial topic that is talked about among many people, and it is an event that happened during World War 2, specially about the first known uses of atomic bombs by the United States. So, was the US justified in dropping the atomic bombs, or not? Let’s talk about it. 

Firstly, background information leading up to this event was that the United States had been at war with Japan for several years now and were facing a bad conflict. The US leadership was faced with the challenge of deciding how to bring the war to an end as quickly as possible while causing the fewest number of deaths because Japan had proven to be a difficult enemy. Two options were formed because of this discussion. The first was to invade Japan, which was estimated to result in the deaths of countless thousands of American soldiers, as well as millions of Japanese civilians. The second choice was to launch the atomic bomb, a recently created weapon that could be able to easily and efficiently put an end to this situation.
In the end, we all know what option the US decided to choose. They decided to use the atomic bombs, and on August 6th and 9th of 1945, they dropped them on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, without a single warning. Over 200,000 people died that day, or were injured as a result of the explosions and radiation sickness that came from the after effects. 

This is where the controversy begins. Some believe that the use of the atomic bombs were appropriate. They say that because it ended the war quickly and avoided a full-scale invasion of Japan, which would have ultimately caused even more casualties, so it saved lives. Basically, they were saying that despite being in defeat, Japan had not given up and that the bombs were required to finally convince them to do so. Though this argument holds some reasonable points, I personally believe that the US was not justified for dropping the bombs. 
Many had speculated that Japan was going to surrender anyway, since they had already suffered multiple significant losses and would gain little to nothing if they continued fighting. The US could have come up with so many other safer methods in order to end the war just as quickly, instead of neglecting the fact that they had killed hundreds of thousands of innocent bystanders, in which most of them were local civilians. 
In conclusion, it is very clear that even now this topic of whether the United States’ decision was justified or not is still up for debate among many, as both sides include many important and reasonable information and perspectives. Either way, having so many people get killed who didn’t even have any relation to the war effort should never be something that should be validated. 
