CHEMICAL CHANGES INFORMATION SHEET

Choice of Topic: Pool Maintenance 

1. Briefly describe the physical and chemical properties of the reactants. (K/U - 4 marks)

CaO: Calcium Oxide 
Physical properties- odourless, white or  a gray-ish solid in the form of hard lumps.
Chemical properties- density of 3.35 g/cm3, melting point is 2572 °C, while boiling point is 2853 °C. Strong irritant to the skin and eyes specifically. 

H2O: Water
Physical properties- clear and colourless, a tasteless liquid.
Chemical properties- low density as a solid, and freezes once below 0 degrees celsius, and in high heat begins to boil and potentially vaporize. 

2. Briefly describe the physical and chemical properties of the products. (K/U - 4 marks)

Calcium Hydroxide 
Physical properties- has a hexagonal crystal structure, colourless, and usually in a powder state.
Chemical properties- density of 2.211g/cm3, melting point of 580°C, boiling point of 2850 °C. Toxic to human skin alone and can cause serious permanent damage in organs. 

3. Give the word & chemical equation for your reaction. *Make sure it’s balanced. (K/U - 3
marks)

Word equation: Calcium oxide reacts with water to form calcium hydroxide. 
Chemical equation: CaO + H2O → Ca(OH)2

4. Describe how the reaction positively impacts society? (for example with respect to the
economy, health, environment, usefulness, etc.) Describe both direct and indirect impacts. (A,
C - 3 marks)

Calcium hydroxide contains a reactant called calcium oxide, otherwise known by its other name quicklime or slaked lime. Specifically for pool maintenance, calcium hydroxide is used in order to change the pH level of the pool. This in turn helps the water, which contains many other chemicals, to stop it from ‘eating away’ at the walls of the pool during colder weather (due to pH levels). Not only this, but this product is used for many other things such as food processing (mainly improves stability of components in food), lime softening (to remove hardness from precipitation), and sewage treatment (adjusts pH, and makes particles within sewer weightier to allow it to pass through quicker), etc. 
5. Describe how the reaction negatively impacts society? (for example with respect to the
economy, health, environment, usefulness, etc.) Describe both direct and indirect impacts. (A,
C - 3 marks)

Though calcium hydroxide is an important thing to have in some cases, it is also a negative cause to many others as well. Such as for humans, having contact with Ca(OH)2 can cause permanent skin diseases, and if you somehow consume this substance, you can suffer from constant burn and coughing in the throat, as well as damage in the lungs which can cause difficulty breathing. As for the environment, it is not considered to be a gigantic threat, unless the calcium hydroxide ends up interacting with more water, which may lead to any toxic gasses being emitted into the air. 

 

