ENG1D - ISP Essay

Choose a topic of your choice and write a formal 3-paragraph essay in response. The topic must be related to English or English literature.

***All topics must be approved by Mr. Radder

Important Checklist: 
The introduction must end with a clear thesis statement
 The body paragraph must integrate one quote to support your evidence (refer to the integrating quotes handout) 
The play must be properly cited at the bottom of the essay’s last page (refer to the MLA Citing Sources handout) 
It is a formal essay and there are no personal pronouns or phrases included
There are no spelling or grammatical errors
The marked essay outline is attached behind the essay

Technical details: 
450-800 words (3-4 pages)
Typed, double-spaced
Standard margins all around
Font Styles: Times New Roman, Arial, or Calibri
Font Size: 12 points

Essay Outline Due Date: May 19, 2022,

Final Essay Due Date: June 13, 2022,

*See the essay rubric on the back
ENG1D Essay Rubric

Your essay will be graded based on this rubric. Use it as a guide when writing your essay and check it again before you submit your essay. 


Assignment Total:      /100 marks




Pre-writing Planner  
Introduction: Lead/Thesis  Statement  

Why Coraline never left the other world  
Body  
Main Idea #1: The portals 

 Detail #1:  There are known to be many portals that lead to the other world and back, one being the door that lead Coraline to the other world in the first place, but on the first visit, notice how Coraline never actually goes back to the real world but just falls asleep and finds herself back to the real world after the other mother TOLD her to go sleep in her “other bedroom”, according to the storyline, it’s not possible to go back and forth to the real world without going through a portal. 


Detail #2: During the movie, the black cat seems to be able to talk in the other world, telling Coraline that he can teleport between the real and other world. “I come and go as I please”. At the very end of the film we see the cat disappearing from the real world  just as he disappeared earlier when demonstrating his skill to Coraline in the other world. Assuming that once you enter the other world, you never return to the real, and the fact we’ve only ever seen the cat teleport away in the other world, means that the reason we can see the cat teleport the same at the end of the movie is because Coraline is still in the other world. 



Detail #3: The well is speculated to be one of the portals which lead to the other world. This is so because at the beginning of the movie, Wybie, Coraline’s same age neighbor, shows Coraline a secret well. While opening the cover, he says “if you fell to the bottom and looked up, you’d see a sky full of stars in the middle of the day.” signifying that the bottom of the well might but as well be the other world, because “night and day and day is night” according to the black cat.  Why is this significant? It’s because at the end of the movie Coraline and Wybie throw the key to the other world as well as the Beldam’s hand down the well. 




Main Idea #2 The pink palace limbo 



Detail #1: The house theory consists of how Coraline comes from the outside aka the real world, into the inside of the house aka the other world. 

Detail #2:  On her first visit to the other world, she falls asleep in her other bedroom instead of going back to the portal aka the door leading to the real world; because of this Coraline is placed in the second floor of the house, aka the pink palace limbo (the pink palace is the apartment Coraline and her family move into at the beginning of the movie). In the pink palace limbo things are placed as an exact replica of the real world, tricking Coraline that she is actually back to the real world. 

Detail #3: When Coraline throws the key down the well which is a supposed alternative portal, she is basically throwing her key back to the real world away, aka locking herself on the second floor, with no way out. 


Main Idea #3  The other mother was always and will always be in control



Detail #1: When the other Wybie helps Coraline escape from the Beldam and to the portal to “the real world”, other Wybie shows Coraline his hand, as he blows it away to dust, telling her that he cannot go with her because he cannot survive in the real world. But the problem is, it is shown in the film that in multiple times rats from the other world have been to the real world, for example when luring Coraline to the other world the first time. We know that the rats are from the other world because the black cat kills one and it turns into the same substance of other Wybie’s hand, at least the remains of it. 

Detail #2:  How is it possible that the other dad and other Wybie can rebel against the Beldam and help Coraline?


Detail #3: When Coraline’s real parents disappear when successfully escaping the Beldam, from that starting point, everything seems off. Coraline doesn’t call the police, even if she is young she should know common procedures. Instead, she goes to Ms. Spink and Ms. Forcible for help; but they don’t call the police either and let Coraline continue to wander off. At the end of the movie after Coraline finally “defeats” the Beldam and supposedly saves her parents, the rest of the storyline never seemed to be unsettling. Her parents’ attitude towards Coraline switches a full 180, as well as the fact they didn’t even seem to notice a whole day has gone by from their disappearance. At the garden party, how come Ms. Spink and Ms. Forcible say anything about their disappearance?

Conclusion: Every event starting from the first time Coraline entered the other world was planned and gone according to the Beldam’s plan. From the portals to the pink palace limbo theory to the rebel of other Wybie and other dad to the unsettling aftermath of the storyline. All of this was an act planned perfectly by the Beldam to ensure Coraline’s willingness to accept her fate.
