Action vs Inaction Research Paper						    By: Misia Lui 10B

An action that was taken up on by individual Charles Darwin was his evolutionary idea of the evolution theory, and how humans originated from pre-existing species that have just morphed/ “evolved” into what we are now. His impact heavily influenced our world today as he was the one who completed our understanding of the copernican revolution, and this is relevant today because even in the present, research, studies, and work, are all rooted back to the base of Darwin’s theory of evolution, because that is what improved our understanding of living things from the beginning. How Darwin came up with this theory in the first place was during a trip to Galapagos Islands in 1835, where he started observing his surroundings and gathering information leading up to evolution. 
Potential consequences in which the situation were to be that Darwin took inaction instead wouldn’t make too much of a difference in the world. This is because of Charles Darwin, many people were close behind in figuring out the theory of evolution; it’s just that Darwin was more efficient in finding the answer. 

Another example of someone taking action that made an impact was Viola Desmond, a Canadian civil rights activist. She is very important to the world and especially Canada because she was the first black woman who was bold enough to directly challenge racial/sexist segregation. Viola changed the world’s perspective on how people were treating others of colour and a lot of her participation was considered in the future. She fought for her right for equality by using her connections as owner of a beauty business sector, she trained her women to learn how to love their appearances and stand up against the backlash of their community. After Viola had gone through countless situations in which she was kicked out and neglected by society she realized how much injustice she and probably countless others had received. She went over her experiences with friends and family and they all agreed to give Viola support if she ever tried to fight back. In fact she did. 
If Viola Desmond decided to be inactive instead of active, the world wouldn’t have been informed or aware of such an issue of segregation, and although it was pretty obvious, no one would’ve stood up for their rights like Viola did. Sure, maybe it is possible that in that future something else would’ve happened that would give people a reality check on this issue, but it might’ve not been such a big significance and our world today would’ve maybe even been closer to the customs of Viola’s generation. The consequences for these bold actions of Viola’s was that she had to leave her husband, and leave her business in Nova Scotia to move to Montreal, as well as getting fined around $20. She got put in court and luckily won an appeal. 

A final example of a person that chose action and impacted the world in a positive way was Mahatma Gandhi. How he did so was that he fought for his independence as well as others in India from Britain. He had to face the control against India from the British Empire as well as the national scale oppression. 
If Gandhi did not act on this so peacefully, it’s possible someone else might’ve acted in a different approach, possibly violently or offensive against the British Empire. Another bad possibility is that no one would’ve tried to fight back and India would have remained in the imprisonment of Britain and would’ve lost themselves culturally wise and possibly fallen into their ways. Though this movement has ended well now and has been resolved, people still use this event in history as a lesson to teach others on the importance of independence within your countries. Though all is well, Gandhi had lead him to be arrested many times. 



