				ENG2D - ISP Comparative Essay
					    Misia Lui 10B

Two unique storylines develop in the novels "Dear Martin" by Nic Stone and "The Book Thief" by Markus Zusak, each offering distinct viewpoints on issues like racism, identity, and social justice. The complexity of human experience is explored in both books, yet they differ in the context of implicit and explicit writing. Examples like the order of events within the story, character evolution between main characters, and the justice system amongst the government will help differentiate between the two.

The order of events between The Book Thief and Dear Martin is critical to the main point of social justice. Dear Martin follows Justyce McAllister as he slowly unravels the truth of society regarding racial injustice and the effects of that through police brutality, as well as the behavioural attitudes of the people around him. This is similar to The Book Thief, where the storyline spotlights a girl named Liesel Meminger as she enters her new life after going to a foster home set in Nazi Germany. The twist is that her entire story is narrated through the eyes of Death. Liesel slowly starts to understand where people stand on a 'racial hierarchy' and how that allows her to develop a sense of justice and many negative feelings. In Dear Martin, the protagonist Justyce starts as an honours Black student attending a predominantly white private school without witnessing too much racism. Things change when his perspective gets flipped a complete 180 after getting handcuffed by a police officer, Tommy Castillo, because of a misunderstanding. All Justyce was doing was struggling to get his drunk ex-girlfriend, Melo, into her car. However, Castillo found the situation suspicious: Justyce was black and wearing dark clothes, while Melo looked like a gorgeous, seemingly white (she is not) girl who was unconscious; "And despite the fact that my ex-girl was visibly drunk off her butt, excuse my language, I apparently looked so menacing in my prep school hoodie.." (Stone 10). In The Book Thief, Liesel starts her story with her brother dying on the train to her new foster home, as Death narrates: "Liesel Meminger – could see without a question that her younger brother, Werner, was now sideways and dead." (Zusak 20). Her mother left her to this new home because she could not properly take care of her and because of her health conditions. Liesel only later on realizes the situation not only happening in her area on Himmel street, but the entirety of Germany. This shows the true meaning of each book, as Dear Martin’s central theme is based on racial discrimination, which is closely tied to the big picture of social justice; meanwhile, The Book Thief’s main theme is more focused on the importance of family and the power of writing and words. This shows which book goes for a more explicit and implicit context. 

Both characters in Dear Martin and The Book Thief drastically change perspectives and attitudes. It is evident of this because we can see Justyce goes from struggling with his identity and voicing his thoughts into writing journal entries to Martin Luther King Jr. to be more like him, as well as being angry about the racial inequality happening in his life, to accepting things as they are and realizing that instead of trying to be more like Martin, he needs to figure out how to handle things on his own opinions and what he should believe in. Meanwhile, Liesel, in The Book Thief, was just a little girl who had gone through traumatic family experiences and did not know how to read or write; this changes as she learns to read and write with the help of her foster father Hans Hubermann, and along with this she learns how to voice her opinions more openly and how to process her emotions and understandings regarding the situation with Hitler. This can be connected to social justice as both start somewhat clueless about the world around them, then realize the harsh reality of racism and the treatment that comes with it can affect their own lives and the people around them. Liesel has her realization of hatred towards the Nazis and Hitler during the event of burning books written by Jews. Because of that, she starts to connect the dots and starts to question if The Führer, referring to Hitler, was the cause of her grief to her biological mother and the disasters happening on Himmel Street. Due to this, Liesel steals a book from the burning pile called 'Shoulder Shrug' out of the anger and the darkness in her heart that starts enveloping her; this means that she has realized the effects Hitler has made throughout her life, and she starts to hate him as said in the book: "Liesel was nor ashamed to have stolen it. And it was anger and dark hatred that had fueled her desire to steal it." (Zusak 84).
Now as for Justyce, social justice can be taken to a different section as he first starts to realize there is some sort of racist inequality around his friend group. Justyce and his best friend Manny are in a friend group with all privileged white boys named Jared, Kyle, Tyler, and Blake during their time at Braselton Preparatory Academy. Though there should be nothing to worry about, Justyce clearly starts to get disturbed once his friends start discussing the social revolution that has changed over the centuries with Manny. "I’m so sick of people suggesting African Americans still have it so hard these days. I don’t care what SJ says, Manny. Your parents are totally proof that things are equal now." (Stone 31); the boys believe that they have an equal standing between all races, yet their remarks clearly disrespect black people. The only reason they would even believe they have an equal opinion on races is that they are friends with Justyce, specifically Manny, since Manny was raised in a primarily white neighbourhood and grew up with money and privilege. Only by chance did Manny have a similar background to those of Jared and the others; otherwise, like Justyce, they would probably not see eye to eye. 

Due to the influence of the government's actions, social justice is a primary reason it may be bad among communities and people. The government in both books, meaning both police and higher-ups, have a very biased perspective on specific people groups, whether it be Jews (The Book Thief) or black people (Dear Martin). It is not very reassuring to know that the leaders of countries and cities also have such a tight opinion on society, ultimately shaping the minds of that entire population. An example of this would be in The Book Thief, where technically, the entire reason for the plotline is due to the fact of Hitler's Reign in Germany and the events of that. Bombings, forced military assignments, as well as the Nazi's attempt to eliminate all traces of Jews, are all things that occur in Liesel's perspective "God, there were so many of them. So many sets of dying eyes and scuffing feet" (Zusak 509). Meaning that the justice system is being forced onto all the citizens in Germany, whether or not they believe it is true, since they could lose their lives if they do not obey. The difference with Dear Martin is that the way justice is handled is due to a more recent approach to racism. One example would be the situation with Justyce and Melo, as discussed earlier, as well another example is when an Officer called Tyson shoots Justyce and Manny and ends up killing Manny in the process. Later in court, Tyson pleads that he is innocent of the shooting as he blames Justyce and Manny for 'provoking' him with their loud music and that the boys also had a gun on them, "The man was defending himself from thugs, if he says those boys had a gun, they had a gun" (Stone 131). This is obviously not true. This situation would probably not have happened if Justyce and Manny were white. Justyce speculates that the cause of Tyson shooting them in the first place is because earlier Manny's cousin Quan had been charged with murdering Officer Tyson's police partner, Officer Castillo. It may have been for revenge, but either way, Tyson's excuses in court were very clearly targeted toward a racial profiling pattern. The way the justice system impacts Dear Martin is different than in The Book Thief, as how the government deals with situations regarding race has been implemented subtly throughout society, somewhat encouraging the horrible racist acts that occur during the novel. Compared to The Book Thief, the Nazis, and Hitler go on their own terms and try to extort their beliefs through the people of Germany. 

Through the books Dear Martin and The Book Thief, it is evident that social justice is a recurring theme in both. This could be an explicit or implicit method of showing it through the order of events in the novels, the main characters' development, and how the justice system is handled. Nevertheless, racism and discrimination should never be validated.


Works Cited
Stone, Nic. Dear Martin. Random House Children's Books, 2018.
Zusak, Markus. The Book Thief. Random House Children's Books, 2007.



