Persons Case Descriptive Essay ISP Rough Draft 

Since anyone can remember, discrimination has always been around, and in this case specifically, misogyny. The Persons Case is about how a group of women, called ‘The Famous Five’, tried to overcome this problem against the government, in which this movement was a key moment in the topic of gender equality. 
1918. The year women were given the right to vote in federal elections. It started off like this, as well as when the first woman ever was elected into the House of Commons the following year. Despite this, the position of Senate was still not open to women; which was around the time the Famous Five had formed due to this. This group consisted of Emily Murphy, who then invited  Nellie McClung, Irene Parlby, Louise McKinney and Henrietta Muir Edwards to band together as women rights activists. 
During this time, the Famous Five decided to sign a letter towards the Supreme Court around 27th of August, 1927, in which they asked the following: “Is power vested in the Governor-General in Council of Canada, or the Parliament of Canada, or either of them, to appoint a female to the Senate of Canada?” and “Is it constitutionally possible for the Parliament of Canada under the provisions of the British North America Act, or otherwise, to make provision for the appointment of a female to the Senate of Canada?”. The minister at the time, Ernest Lapoint, answered as to why Women were not eligible to run for Senate, and that was due to Section 24 of the BNA act that states that “The Governor General shall from Time to Time, in the Queen's Name, by Instrument under the Great Seal of Canada, summon qualified Persons to the Senate..” (“Section 24”). The government had believed that women were not allowed to run for this specific position because women were not considered as ‘persons/people’; at least under the law.  For this reason, the Famous Five took it upon themselves to bring this situation to the attention of the court. They argued that the term ‘persons/people’ should not only be limited to men, but to women as well, because otherwise ‘persons’ wouldn’t have made sense if it was just another terminology for men. To their dismay, the Supreme Court of Canada had had this case brought to their attention, which they quickly decided to reject. Of course, this wasn’t enough to stop the efforts of these women, as they immediately moved on to try and find better efforts in getting this case approved. 
The Famous Five, after getting ruled against from the Supreme Court, decided to reach even higher authority to appeal to in hopes of a better outcome. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London, also known as one of the highest courts in the land at the time, was where these determined women decided to take their case to. Two years later, in 1929, the British Privy Council passed this request, stating that women were indeed persons under the law, and that they were eligible to be appointed to the Senate.
 The Persons Case was a major victory for women's rights in Canada. It paved the way for greater gender equality in politics and society, and it helped to break down barriers that had long held women back. The Famous Five became symbols of women's empowerment and progress, and they inspired a generation of women to fight for their rights and freedoms.

