Door 1 Questions 
Misia Lui 9B

a) The areas I understand well are relations, polynomials, coding, and finance. 
The areas where I should review or learn again are grade 8 review, equations, modeling with graphs, and linear relations.

b) 

     3.  a) Pages in the math textbook in which I can get helpful information:
Pg. 296 (6.1 intro to y = mx + b) 
Pg.128 #1-8 (exponent laws) 
Pg.126 #9a, 9d, 9g, 10 (exponent laws) 
Pg. 201, pg. 209 (multistep equations) 
Pg. 215, 226 (modeling with equations) 
Pg. 224 (Direct variation) 
Pg. 251 (partial variation) 
Pg. 330 (Point and slopes) 
Pg. 342 (Two points) 

b) No important idea I was unsure of. 

c) Like terms - Adding and subtracting to simplify algebraic expressions.

4. Day 5- Gather all math notes throughout the year and organize them if not already done. Then read through all of them while highlighting all vital points in each unit, then write them down on sticky notes for future use. Using the test outline (aka all the tests through the year), see all the questions and the answers that were given, in order to find a taste of what might be on the test. 

Day 4- Read out all your notes twice (auditory learner), then try using your notes and correspond them to the past test questions to see your answer match, then compare. Afterwards call a friend and try to teach them in areas they don’t understand, or write a summary of each unit through a chat.

Day 3-  Continue writing summaries of each unit, this time while writing, say out loud what you are writing to engrave information into your head. For each unit come up with symbols in order to identify which information is which. Using those symbols, write one final summary for each and put it all in one sheet including the formulas, and how to calculate them. 

Day 2- Using past tests, create questions that are a mix of all of them, as well as using homework questions and choose the ones most likely to be on the exam. 

Day 1- The day of the exam, read over all re-written notes and formulas, as it is an open book exam, just make sure to understand where everything is for information using the symbols, and understand basic formulas. 

5.  Learning style: Auditory learner
Recite notes out loud a couple of times in order to remember information. 
While writing notes, say what you are writing. 
Get into a call with a few friends and teach the entire curriculum to them. While helping them, you will also be helping yourself as well. 
