
 
 Bible Assignment:
 Books of Prophecy
Esther



REL20B
By: Misia Lui 10B
Date: September 29, 2022
Q1. Esther is the only one of two books in which a woman was named after. The genre is historical. 
Q2. The author of the book of Esther is unknown, but it is speculated that the person who wrote it was close with the royal persian court. 
Q3. The date it was written was the 8th century BC (359-338 BC)
Q4. The book’s main audience was for Jewish people to record the origins and learn the reasoning of the Feast of Purim.
Q5. The structure of the book - this includes opening, body, closing with verse numbers  and main topics (use ESV.org as a resource)
Opening (1:1-22) 
This book is set in Susa which is a Persian capital, and introduces the ruler of Persia, King Ahasuerus and how he has a banquet that lasts 180 days just for the sole purpose of honoring his “royal glory and splendor”. During the banquet, the King asks his Queen, Queen Vashti to show an appearance to the crowd and show off her beauty and radiance. Vashti refuses which results in King Ahasuerus being enraged and out of anger creates a law that states that all wives of Persian men must submit to them; all this just because Queen Vashti refused him once.  
The appearance of Esther (2:1-18)
The next chapter of the book tells us how on top of the King issuing a new law for the wives of Persian men, King Ahasuerus also dethrowns Queen Vashti and proceeded to immediately replace her by finding a new Queen in a pageant filled with young women all across Susa. This is when Mordecai, a Jew, and also the cousin of Esther, agrees to let Esther join the banquet. Esther was a young lady who never had parents, thus needed Mordecai to raise her since little. She had a very beautiful figure and a pretty face, which was ultimately one of the reasons why King Ahasuerus took favour in Esther, therefore allowing Esther to win the pageant and become the new Queen of Persia. 
Mordecai’s impact (2:19-23) 
While waiting outside the castle, Mordecai walks in on guards saying they want to kill the King, which he immediately tells Esther to tell King Ahasuerus. This results in the King favoring Mordecai for saving his life. 
Haman’s Decree (3:1-15) 
A man named Haman, an Agagite was promoted to second importance in position next to King Ahasuerus. Haman would command the people outside of the ground in the castle to bow down to him and respect him. All did, except for Mordecai. This made Haman loathe Mordecai, leading him to get revenge by planning to kill all Jews (Mordecai is Jewish) on the 13th day of the 12th month. (Oddly enough the King agreed and they celebrated this horrible decision.)
Esther’s Contribution (4:1-17) 
Mordecai, now finding out Haman’s plan informs Esther and forms a plan with her to reveal to the King that she is also Jewish in order to support her reasoning to ask the King to revoke this new law. This plan consists mainly of two Banquets for King Ahasuerus and Haman as well as Esther hosting it. 
The First Banquet (5:1-14, 6:1-13) 
During the first banquet, everything goes smoothly and it ends in Esther being invited to another banquet the following day. Haman, coming out of the banquet satisfied, bumps into Mordecai, and claims that he will get Mordecai executed. That night, King Ahasuerus cannot sleep and orders to be read scrolls. During that, he remembers how Mordecai saved his life earlier and the next morning orders Haman to bring Mordecai all around Susa in the finest clothing and honor. (To Haman’s horrible displeasure) 
The Second Banquet (7:1-10) 
The second banquet arrives, and the King and Haman arrive. King Ahasuerus asks Queen Esther what her wish is that he is more than happy to fulfill, and Esther explain how the decree that has been announced is to kill all Jews, then reveals how she is a Jew and how the only reason why this law stands is due to Haman’s grudge against Mordecai. She asks that Haman is to be punished and the law should be revoked. King Ahasuerus is shocked at this information and immediately executes Haman (per Esther’s request). 
The Law Outcome (8:1-17, (9:1-19)
King Ahasuerus explains to Mordecai and Queen Esther that once a law is released, you cannot revoke it. However, the King issues a new decree stating that on the day the Jews are expected to be executed, all Jews can defend themselves and fight back whoever tries to kill them. This resulted in 500 men dying, as well as all 10 of Haman’s sons being executed. The law proceeds to state that a second day can be used for Jews to fight back to anyone who ever hurt them in the past; final outcome of this law resulted in 75,000 enemies killed. 
The Feast of Purim (9:20-32, 10:1-3)
Due to the outcome of the recent events, Queen Esther and King Ahasurus make a new holiday to commemorate the recent events. Meaning that on the 15th day of the 12th month every year there would be a Feast of Purim. Later, Mordecai was promoted to second in command to the King, to replace Haman.


Q6. The main themes of the book 
There are 4 themes that show importance in the book of Esther: 

Community and accommodation- It is shown countless times how many of the events that happen in this book are the result of communicating between the King and the people of Susa. Without Mordecai’s warnings and plannings with Esther, he would’ve died, along with every other Jew. 
“22 And this came to the knowledge of Mordecai, and he told it to Queen Esther, and Esther told the king in the name of Mordecai. 23 When the affair was investigated and found to be so, the men were both hanged on the gallows.” (2:22-23) 

Representation of God’s absence- Notice how God hasn’t been mentioned even once in this entire book. This is trying to tell us that despite God's absence, through this story of Esther it is proven that he works miracles, even when no one realizes. There have been many coincidences throughout the story that all point to God’s doing. You don’t need to have CLEAR signs of God’s presence to be able work through Him. 
“On that night the king could not sleep. And he gave orders to bring the book of memorable deeds, the chronicles, and they were read before the king. 2 And it was found that Mordecai had told about Bigthan and Teresh, two of the king’s eunuchs, who guarded the threshold, and who had sought to lay hands on King Ahasuerus.” (6:1-2) 
The cost of discipleship- Through Esther, we can see how hard it is to do the right thing, especially when your life could be in danger. Esther stood up with her loyalty to her people in order to confront King Ahasuerus about the situation at hand, even if she knew that you could get killed if you just show up before the King. 
“…there is but one law—to be put to death, except the one to whom the king holds out the golden scepter so that he may live. But as for me, I have not been called to come in to the king these thirty days.” (4:11)
 “…Then I will go to the king, though it is against the law, and if I perish, I perish.” (4:16) 

Unrestrained use and abuse of power- Haman is an example of how power can be abused and used for evil. Though it also shows us how Esther has power as well, but uses it for the good of her fellow Jews to save them. 
“So, as they had made known to him the people of Mordecai, Haman sought to destroy all the Jews, the people of Mordecai, throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus.” (3:6) 

Q7. Three questions you have from reading the book 
When the decree of how Jews were able to fight back was released, 75,000 people in Susa died. Was deaths with such a significant number normal? No one seemed to be traumatized. 
Why was it custom to only be able to enter the King’s courtroom with invitation, and without you could get executed? Especially for Esther, as she is the Queen? 
What was Haman’s wife’s reaction to his death? 

Q8. Reflection: one paragraph of personal reflection (things you learned) from the book 
	When I decided to choose this book for this project, I would’ve expected it to be like every other prophet book, having God as the main focus and having miracles worked through Him. After reading the whole book, I can say that I was wrong. God wasn’t mentioned a single time. That’s a little weird, considering it’s the Bible, but the significance of God’s absence was actually really meaningful. Basically every book in the Bible shows God clearly working miracles through people, but I think the meaning behind Esther was to show that even if God isn’t mentioned in the story nor had anyone acknowledge Him, He’s always there. Within the book of Esther, there are way too many coincidences that land every scenario perfectly in its place in order for the ending to be as satisfying as it is. This is because God is behind the scenes making this happen (at least this is what I believe). It brings a comforting message to me knowing that though sometimes I question God’s presence in my life, He’s always there, watching and helping in any way He can, as long as I believe. Things worked out so well for Mordecai and Esther, and it was because they trusted each other and did what was right for their people, even if it meant they had to rebel against who they were loyal to. 

Sources: 
Esv: Study Bible : English Standard Version. Wheaton, Ill: Crossway Bibles, 2007. Print.
https://www.esv.org/Esther+1/
https://enterthebible.org/courses/esther/lessons/theological-themes-in-esther
