Persons Case Descriptive Essay ISP: Annotated Bibliography

Entry #1 (Marshall)
Britannica’s site provides a general overview of the Persons Case, though nothing too important compared to other sites. Its most important points to note are of the battle fought by the Famous Five to have women recognized as "persons" under Canadian law. The article explains the significance of the Privy Council's 1929 decision, because it created major history as the first ever retribution against misogyny. It goes more in depth about the broader impact of empowering women and setting an example for gender equality in Canada; but this was not added into the essay. I used this site to relate to how the Famous Five responded to the claim of women not being considered people.

Entry #2  (McMahon and Sharpe pg.5, 27)
This book basically describes the entire situation regarding the person’s case and also mentions the origins of the case and the influential role played by the Famous Five in challenging the exclusion of women from the definition of ‘persons.’ I used this site, along with Britannica to help further understand the meaning behind what ‘persons’ means. This book was not accessible within my local library, meaning I could only read so many free pages online. 





Entry #3 (Paterson and Mennie)
 The Persons Case, as described in ‘The Canadian Encyclopedia’, was a history changing event in Canadian history that fought for women's rights. The article outlines key points of the case, such as the Famous Five's challenge to excluding women from the legal definition of "persons." It also highlights the women's journey to the Privy Council in London and the landmark 1929 ruling that recognized women as "persons" under the law. This victory had profound outcomes in the future, empowering women to participate in politics, education, and the workforce. I chose this article for research mainly because it included the contents of the letter the Famous Five wrote to Lapoint, as well as the response Lapoint wrote them back. All additional information inside the article was put into account while writing (this goes for every article).

Entry #4 (“The 'Persons' Case — Famou5”)
 This site is just like every other website that talks about the Persons Case, as well as shedding light on the enduring legacy of the Persons Case, celebrating the progress made in advancing women's rights and encouraging ongoing advocacy for equality. The only difference is that this website includes a lot of smaller details including where the Famous Five first formed, what they were doing, as well as the atmosphere that was shown within these events. This was very useful to me for the entire writing process of my essay as it is supposed to be descriptive. 




Entry #5 (“Section 24”)
Section 24 of the BNA Act is basically stating how “every Person so summoned shall become and be a Member of the Senate and a Senator.” This caused a lot of controversy during the 1920’s, as many, including the government, did not believe women were considered ‘persons’, therefore were not eligible for the Senate. This act is basically the basis of the entire Persons Case situation. Later on, the Famous Five obviously helped justify that women were indeed persons, but Section 24 still remains a very important part of the constitutional framework that shapes Canada's legislative processes.

Works Cited
Marshall, Tabitha. “Persons Case | Canadian law case.” Britannica, (Marshall)
https://www.britannica.com/event/Persons-Case. Accessed 5 June 2023.
McMahon, Patricia I., and Robert J. Sharpe. The Persons Case: The Origins and Legacy of the Fight for Legal Personhood. Osgoode Society for Canadian Legal History, 2007.
Paterson, Barbara, and Marc Mennie. (Paterson and Mennie) “Persons Case.” The Canadian Encyclopedia, 6 November 2020, https://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/persons-case. Accessed 5 June 2023.
“The 'Persons' Case — Famou5.” Famous 5 Foundation, https://www.famous5.ca/the-persons-case. Accessed 5 June 2023.
“Section 24.” Constitution of Canada: The British North America Act, 1867; Its Interpretation, Gathered from the Decisions of Courts, the Dicta of Judges, and the Opinions of Statesmen and Others (Classic Reprint), by Joseph Doutre, Fb&c Limited, 2018. Accessed 5 June 2023.





