A Corinthian Problem…
Your local church is facing a problem, and it involves people you know.  As you are told about the problem, you realize that Paul dealt with a very similar issue in his letter to the Corinthian church.  You decide to write a letter to the people involved, giving them some Biblical advice and encouragement.
In your letter, you must:
Par #1: Explain how a similar problem was experienced in the church at Corinth, citing specific references.
Par #2: Explain what Paul’s advice was to the ancient church, citing specific references.
Par #3: Apply this advice to the present day situation with some thoughtful guidance for the people involved.
Choose from one of the situations below:
Michael was involved in leading a summer ministry camp at the church.  At the end of the month, he received some payment for the time he had worked.  He was paid minimum wage and had expected more based on his experience.  He is now planning to take the Children’s Pastor to court to insist on receiving a higher rate of pay.  What would you say to your friend? 

One of your friends, Carly, has just come to Christ.  During her first time at church, she is eagerly greeted by several members, who each try to convince her to join their small group.  They each point out how effective and interesting their own leader is, and how the other leaders are just not as good.  Soon, Carly is totally overwhelmed and doesn’t know which group to attend.  What advice would you give to the church members?

Two older friends at church have started dating and you are concerned that they are not honoring God in their relationship.  You want to encourage them to be pure and Godly in their treatment of one another.  What advice would you give them?

Your parents are having some friends over from church for an informal meal.  Your parents are accustomed to having a glass of wine with their meal and are planning to serve some wine to their adult guests.  You are aware that one of the people coming over has had a drinking problem in the past, and you think it is best for your parents not to offer wine to any of the guests.  What would you say to your parents? 

Marking Checklist:
