


Peoples Christian Academy










Why Coraline Never Left the Other World















Misia Lui 
ENG1D 
Mr. Radder
June 14, 2022
 Coraline is a movie set in Ashland, Oregon, where Coraline Jones and her family move into a place called the Pink Palace apartments. Coraline’s parents never gave her much attention and treated her very emotionlessly, as their first priority was their jobs. Coraline finds a small door hidden under a wall of old wallpaper which was an entrance to a seemingly better version of her life called the “other world”, where she meets her other mother and father, as well as everyone in her real life; except they have buttons as eyes. Everything unfolds quickly as Coraline realizes this was a trick by the other mother, or the Beldam, in order to steal her soul, as she did with countless other children. Many events happen, leading her to finally escape the grasp of the Beldam, resulting in a happy ending. But is that really what happened? Did Coraline really leave the other world? The portals which connect the real world to the other world, the Pink Palace limbo theory, and the Other Mother’s control over everything will prove that the ending of Coraline is not what it seems. 

There are known to be many portals that lead to the other world and back, with one being the door that leads Coraline to the other world in the first place, but on the first visit, notice how Coraline never actually goes back to the real world. She just falls asleep and finds herself back to the real world after the other mother told her to go sleep in her “other bedroom”. According to the storyline, it is not possible to go back and forth to the real world without going through a portal. So with that, it seems very unlikely that Coraline ever returned to the real world after her first visit. During the movie, the black cat seems to be able to talk in the other world, telling Coraline that he can teleport between the real and other world. “I come and go as I please” (Coraline, 2009). At the very end of the film we see the cat disappearing from the real world just as he disappeared earlier when demonstrating his skill to Coraline in the other world. Assuming that once someone enters the other world, they never return to the real world. The fact it only ever shows the cat teleporting away in the other world means that the reason it shows the cat teleporting the same at the end of the movie is because Coraline is still in the other world. Another portal vital to this theory is the well. The well is speculated to be one of the portals which lead to the other world. This is proven because at the beginning of the movie, Wybie, Coraline’s same-aged neighbor, shows Coraline a secret well. While opening the cover, he says, “if you fell to the bottom and looked up, you’d see a sky full of stars in the middle of the day.” (Coraline, 2009) signifying that the bottom of the well might as well be the other world, because “night is day and day is night” (Coraline, 2009) according to the black cat. Why is this significant? It is because at the end of the movie Coraline and Wybie throw the key that opens the portal to the other world as well as the Beldam’s hand down the well. 

The Pink Palace limbo theory is created by The Fangirl on Youtube (2016) and can be represented by a two storey house. Starting off, it consists of how Coraline comes from the outside, aka the real world, into the inside of the house, aka the other world. On her first visit to the other world, she falls asleep in her other bedroom instead of going back to the portal, aka the door leading to the real world; because of this, Coraline was then placed on the second floor of the house, aka the Pink Palace limbo, a place of illusion. In the pink palace limbo, things are placed as an exact replica of the real world, tricking Coraline to think that she is actually back to the real world. When Coraline throws the key down the well which is a supposed alternative portal, she is basically throwing her key back to the real world away, aka locking herself on the second floor, with no way out. The reason as to why the Beldam’s hand was trying to stop Coraline from throwing the key down the well was because it means Coraline was bringing the key back to the actual real world, where the Beldam cannot reach (Of course, Coraline nor Wybie has any idea that the well is a portal).

This part of the theory is presented by BigOEntertainment on Youtube (2018) When the other Wybie helps Coraline escape from the Beldam and to the portal to “the real world”, other Wybie shows Coraline his hand, as he blows it away to dust, telling her that he cannot go with her because he cannot survive in the real world. But the problem is, it is shown in the film multiple times rats from the other world have been to the real world, for example when luring Coraline to the other world the first time. We know that the rats are from the other world because the black cat kills one and it turns into the same substance of the other Wybie’s hand, at least the remains of it. Another plot whole in the movie is how it is possible that the other Dad and other Wybie can rebel against the Beldam and help Coraline when trying to escape the other world. How come other Wybie could not go to the “real world” while the rats could? If the Beldam is the creator of the other world, how can her own creations go against her when they should not have a conscience of their own in the first place? That is because they are not rebelling at all. Their betrayal to the Beldam was an act of deception in order to trick Coraline, when in reality, the Beldam deliberately lost in order to give her false hope. When Coraline’s real parents disappear when successfully escaping the Beldam, from that starting point, everything seems off. Coraline does not call the police; even if she is young she should know common procedures. Instead, she goes to Ms. Spink and Ms. Forcible for help, her downstairs neighbors; but even they, adults, do not call the police either and let Coraline continue to wander off. At the end of the movie after Coraline finally “defeats” the Beldam and supposedly saves her parents, the rest of the storyline seemed to be unsettling. Her parents’ attitude towards Coraline switches a full 180, from emotionless to loving and happy; as well as the fact they do not even seem to notice a whole day has gone by from their disappearance. At the garden party, how come Ms. Spink and Ms. Forcible do not say anything about their previous disappearance? That is because none of the people around Coraline now are real. They are all puppets controlled by the Beldam on the second level of the house, the Pink Palace limbo. The Beldam “lost” on purpose for one part in order to win in the overall plan, which was to get Coraline to accept her life in the other world, even without her knowing, allowing the Beldam to steal her soul.

Every event starting from the first time Coraline entered the other world was planned and gone according to the Beldam’s plan. From the portals to the pink palace limbo theory to the rebel of other Wybie and other dad to the unsettling aftermath of the storyline. All of this was an act planned perfectly by the Beldam to ensure Coraline’s willingness to accept her fate.











MLA Citation: 
Works Cited
“Coraline Theory - Part 2 - Never Escapes the Pink Palace Limbo - The Fangirl.” YouTube, The Fangirl, 16 September 2016, https://youtu.be/awatg9w7DeQ. Accessed 14 June 2022.

“Did Coraline really escape? (Coraline Theory).” YouTube, BigOEntertainment, 15 August 2018, https://youtu.be/WC-wV0cjfPM. Accessed 14 June 2022.

Selick, Henry, director. Coraline. 2002. Laika Pandemonium Films, 2009. (Three references) 








