How does eating well affect Stress and Depression, and Gut? (2 marks)

Usually during a period of stress and/or depression, a person will be prone to eating processed foods and any foods with high sugar levels, as well as caffeine. Whether or not they consume too much or too little, it’s never a good idea to eat such foods during this period. If you eat fruits and vegetables, and omega-3 fatty acids, it will be better for your system; eating dark leafy vegetables can protect the brain and also potentially uplift your overall mood, and continue to make you healthy. Surprisingly, gut bacteria inside your body is apparently responsible for 95% of a person’s serotonin, and if you have stress and negative emotions, it can potentially block off a lot of the gut bacteria, putting you in an even worse mood. 

What is “Mindful Eating”? Why is this important? (2 marks)

Mindful eating is being aware of your eating habits, and whenever you eat you decide whether or not you should be eating it in the first place. Most of the time, we completely ignore that and just eat whatever tastes good, but it may not be good for us. Mindful eating is important because it can help us judge how we eat throughout the day. Keeping track of what we eat in a journal or something similar can help us identify what areas and situations in which we tend to eat the most unhealthy and change it. 

What are 3 foods that should be included in a healthy mental diet? What are the benefits of each? (6 marks)

Complex carbohydrates- You can receive energy from foods like brown rice and starchy greens. More nutritious and longer-lasting than sugar’s simple carbs are foods like quinoa, millet, beets, and sweet potatoes.

Lean proteins- provide the energy necessary for your body to think and respond fast. Chicken, meat, fish, eggs, soybeans, nuts, and seeds are good sources of protein.

Fatty acids- essential for the healthy operation of your nerve system and brain. They can be found in flaxseeds, fish, meat, eggs, and dairy products.

List 3 healthy food tips and the benefits each provides. (3 marks)

When you're hungry, eat something healthy like fruit, almonds, hard-boiled eggs, baked sweet potatoes, or edamame. You will have more energy from this than from packaged goods.
If you consume plenty of healthy fats, such as olive oil, coconut oil and avocado, it will support your brain function.
You shouldn’t shop while you’re hungry, because it will be more likely that you will make an unhealthy impulse buy. 

