Misia Lui 9B 

Questions: 

Say your name and explain your background or education.

Explain your role in the school 

If a field trip happens in the future, what would be the procedure to keep everything in order? 

What would be the normal procedure when you try to start a new topic/club/event? 

If there were no pandemic, how would things be different in your position? 

When you need assistance in any problem, who do you look for to help?

In which situations would you go to the student body for help? 

When needing to inform someone on a status report, who would you go to? 

Describe the relationship with your peers and the people around you.

 Who is in charge of your position in school? 

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#1 Interviewee

Mr. Lau, works at PCA, athletic director, teaches in highschool (teaches science, phs-ed, civics), went to school in University of Guelph for 4 years, Tindale for one year for teachers college.
Role: Community club advisor-  create events for school community, facilitate the students who have ideas to propose, approve of which ideas are okay and not okay to shortlist them, provide resources for students to lead events. 
Delegate rules of what needs to be accomplished, and proofreading event guidelines before distributing to students, report to vice principal (Mrs. Lee) in case of decisions that were overlooked. 
Talk to Mrs. Lee or Mr. Choi, as long as it's appropriate it’ll be okay. Not like permission just more over letting them know about it.
There would be athletics, running teams like intramurals (dodgeball etc.), the way classes are being held (no zoom), CC would be the student council, having held a lot more events than now. 
Go to co-workers, not usually vice principal or Mr. Choi; unless it’s a big problem. Otherwise go to fellow teachers.
Things that affect the student body in terms of extracurriculars or fundiments, sometimes on project information (whether or not essay, video, or other options are available).
Mrs. Lee, Mr. Choi
Professional, very positive, lots of friendships with coworkers outside of school.
Mr. Abdulnor, and Mrs. Lee



#2 Interviewee

Office worker, education is  different from job right now, studied computer science programming, has a minor in business administration, changed working field and now works as a PCA office administrator.
Works as an office administrator. Takes care of attendance and absences from students, if anything needs to be followed up to people, handles last productions of report cards (between envelopes, photocopies, signatures, etc.), takes care of responding to most email accounts, handles injuries from students, and updates information on students and parents.
Attendance for the trips. 
When concerts used to happen before covid, would be part of designing the flyers, collecting front covers for the flyers, putting in all the information inside and signing it, as well as photocopying it. 
Things would be very different, but as people are adjusting and enhancing technology to deal with the pandemic, it is much more efficient now. 
Anyone from the principal, vice principal, or teachers, or Mr. Overbreak. 
Not much of an interaction unless it’s to help the students. 
Go to the supervisor.
All people working within the school are one community and dealt with in a friendly environment. 
Principal, vice principal, direct boss, any teachers; pretty much any of the people working in PCA. Priority would go according to position, but anyone could ask to get something processed no problem. 



#3 Interviewee

Cindy Song, used to go to Finch public school, now in PCA.
Grade nine student, member of the Community Club.
Make forms, get them approved by Mrs.lee, hand them out to students, collect them back after signing. 
Ask a teacher for authorization. 
Instead of the Community Club there would be Student Council, more events frequently, more options to explore for those events. 
Ask teachers, vice principal, or guidance counselor, depending on the situation.
When there are homework questions. 
If it’s serious go to Mrs. Lee (Vice principal), if not too serious, go to Mr Lau (Teacher supervisor for CC). 
For other students and classmates: Really good relationships, talk to them frequently with ease, like to make plans with each other. 
For teachers:  Pretty good relationship. Say hi to them in the halls and have conversations with them during class.
Mr. Lau, Mrs. Lee. 


Jump In #2 Pg. 159

After conducting all the interviews and looking at their answers, I’ve come to a conclusion that PCA is most likely a pyramid system. The reason for this is because from the three interviewees, when the question “When you need assistance in any problem, who do you look for to help?” (#6) is asked, coming from a student, they would go to the teachers (etc.); for teachers they’d either go to their colleagues or the principal and/or vice principal; and for office workers that would be more selective, but the answer that was spoken for this question specifically said “Priority would go according to position..”, which finalized my guess of our school being a pyramid system. Every position on the pyramid system would usually go for a position higher than their own; and even though our school’s community is truly very connected, it wouldn’t be enough for it to be in a cell system. 







