The Resurrection of Jesus Christ
The truth of the Christian faith entirely rests on one single event: The resurrection of Jesus from the dead.  No other religion or belief system hinges so centrally on one event as Christianity!
The Apostle Paul, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, acknowledged the centrality of the resurrection to the truth of Christianity when he wrote to the Christians in Corinth.
Now I would remind you, brothers, of the gospel I preached to you, which you received, in which you stand, 2 and by which you are being saved, if you hold fast to the word I preached to you—unless you believed in vain.3 For I delivered to you as of first importance what I also received: that Christ died for our sins in accordance with the Scriptures, 4 that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day in accordance with the Scriptures, 5 and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve. 6 Then  he appeared to more than five hundred brothers at one time, most of whom are still alive, though some have fallen asleep. 7 Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles. 8 Last of all, as to one untimely born, he appeared also to me. 9 For I am the least of the apostles, unworthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God. 10 But by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace toward me was not in vain. On the contrary, I worked harder than any of them, though it was not I, but the grace of God that is with me. 11 Whether then it was I or they, so we preach and so you believed.12 Now if Christ is proclaimed as raised from the dead, how can some of you say that there is no resurrection of the dead? 13 But if there is no resurrection of the dead, then not even Christ has been raised. 14 And if Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain and your faith is in vain. 15 We are even found to be misrepresenting God, because we testified about God that he raised Christ, whom he did not raise if it is true that the dead are not raised. 16 For if the dead are not raised, not even Christ has been raised. 17 And if Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile and you are still in your sins. 18 Then those also who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished. 19 If in Christ we have hope in this life only, we are of all people most to be pitied.                                                                                                             1 Corinthians 15
What is of “first importance” in Christianity?  


Why does the Apostle Paul consider himself to be “untimely born?” and “the least of all the apostles?”  
Paul considers himself to be “untimely born” as he was the last apostle Jesus appeared (to qualify as an apostle 

To whom did Jesus appear in his resurrected body during the 40 days between his resurrection and his ascension? 

Jesus appeared to Cephas (Peter), the 12 apostles, James, 500 brothers at once, all the apostles and Paul as well. 


 What are four particular implications, from 1 Corinthians 15,  that follow if Jesus had not been raised from the dead? 
Our preaching is in vain 
Our faith is in vain
We are still in our sins
W are misrepresenting God

Why does Paul conclude that if Jesus had not risen from the dead, then Christians, more than anyone else should be pitied?  
Because Christinas have believed a lie or a myth and based their life and eternity on something that will not happen. 





What is one thing you learned or were reminded of watching the video on why the resurrection matters?  
















Alternate Theories to a Literal Resurrection
