Misia Lui 10B

Role: Farmer
Audience: Journal
Form: Journal Entry 
Topic:	Farmer abandoning his farm due to certain circumstances 	

…	…	…	…	…	…	…	…	…	…	…	…	…

Title: It’s For The Best. 

April 16, 1935

I’m leaving the farm in a few hours to Regina, for good. Yes, it is a bit of a rushed decision, but I thought it through the past day, and I am sure this is the best decision. Two days ago, a gigantic dust storm beyond explanation washed over my farm and blew away all remaining signs of life and possible crops that I had worked so hard to grow back since the dust bowl had started. This has been going on since 31’, and honestly I think this storm was a sign for me to finally leave this life behind. Following this unbelievable disaster that had showed up a few years ago, I’ve been trying to keep positivity in hopes of living through this and rebuilding the farm. Not even just the dust storms, but the worsening drought and struggling to find sources of hydration is getting exhausting; and not to mention the dreaded grasshoppers. I hate grasshoppers. To this day I am still picking out grasshoppers from the sheds and fields, dead AND alive. I remember when the very first grasshopper storm came, I didn’t know what to expect; and I knew it would be bad but, of course, it’s worse. A possible main factor in my decision making was the fact that  my income has become dangerously low. Trust me, I have always loved living and taking care of my farm, but the drought has drained the quality from my wheat fields, meaning that if this keeps up I will barely be able to afford to live here if I don't sell more soon. The government has been aiding some of my needs, as well as many other of my neighbors, but I’m afraid it’s just not enough. If the dust bowl keeps up, I doubt that my farm will ever start to grow the fresh, crisp, and healthy crops that I had had once not too long ago. Moving to a safer city like Regina and not having to worry about maintaining my home so intently will benefit me a lot, as I am growing older and should retire soon anyways. I will always remember the memories I made on this farm, and I hope one day to visit again to see what has become of it… of course only after the Dust Bowl finally disappears for good. I feel sorry for abandoning such a big part of my life, but it’s for the best. 

