ENG2D - ISP Essay

You will write a formal 3-paragraph essay comparing and contrasting the books: Dear Martin and The Book Thief. You will need to integrate specific themes, topics, or ideas for the body paragraphs. These should be cohesive and inline with your thesis statement. Each paragraph must include at least ONE quote from each book for a total of at least 2 quotes per body paragraph.  The question that you will address is how these two stories illustrate the issue of social justice in the world? How are the two perspectives similar and how are they different?



Important Checklist: 
The introduction must end with a clear thesis statement
 The body paragraph must integrate two quotes to support your evidence 
The novels and other sources must be properly cited both in text and in the bibliography
It is a formal essay and there are no personal pronouns or phrases included
There are no spelling or grammatical errors
The marked essay outline is attached behind the essay

Technical details: 
1000-1500  words (6 - 8 pages)
Typed, double-spaced
Standard margins all around
Font Styles: Times New Roman, Arial, or Calibri
Font Size: 12 points

Essay Outline Due Date: May 19, 2023,

Final Essay Due Date: June 9, 2023,

*See the essay rubric on the back
ENG1D Essay Rubric

Your essay will be graded based on this rubric. Use it as a guide when writing your essay and check it again before you submit your essay. 


Assignment Total:      /100 marks




Pre-writing Planner  
Introduction: Lead/Thesis  Statement  
Two unique storylines develop in the novels "Dear Martin" by Nic Stone and "The Book Thief" by Markus Zusak, each of which offers distinct viewpoints on issues like racism, identity, and most of all, social justice. The complexity of human experience is explored in both books, yet they differ in context of implicit and explicit writing. Examples like the order of events within the story, character evolution between main characters, and the justice system amongst the government will help differentiate between the two. 
Body  
Main Idea #1 The order of events

Detail #1:  The order of events between The Book Thief and Dear Martin are very important to the main point of social justice. Dear Martin follows Justyce McAllister, as he slowly unravels the truth of society regarding racial injustice, and the effects of that through police brutality, as well as the behavioural attitudes from the people around him. This is similar to The Book Thief, where the storyline spotlights a girl named Liesel Meminger as she enters her new life after going to a foster home set in Nazi Germany. The twist is that her entire story is narrated through the eyes of Death. Liesel slowly starts to understand where people stand on a ‘racial hierarchy’, and how that allows her to develop a sense of justice, but a multitude of negative feelings as well. 

Detail #2: In Dear Martin, the protagonist Justyce starts off as just an honours Black student attending a mostly white private school, without having to witness too much racism in his life. This changes when his perspective gets flipped a full 180 after getting handcuffed by a police officer, Tommy Castillo, because of a misunderstanding. All Justyce was doing was struggling to get his drunk ex-girlfriend, Melo, into her car, but to Castillo, the reason he found the situation suspicious was due to the fact Justyce was black and wearing dark clothes, while Melo looked like a gorgeous seemingly white (she isn’t) girl who was unconscious. 


Detail #3: In The Book Thief, Liesel starts her story with her brother dying on the train to her new foster home, as well as her mother leaving her to this new home because she could not properly take care of her, and because of her health conditions.

Main Idea #2 Character evolution

Detail #1: Both characters in Dear Martin and The Book Thief go through drastic changes regarding perspectives and attitudes. This is evident because we can see Justyce goes from struggling with his identity and voicing his thoughts into writing journal entries to Martin Luther King Jr. to be more like him, as well as being angry about the racial inequality happening in his life, to accepting things as they are and realizing that instead of trying to be more like Martin, he needs to figure out how to handle things on his own opinions and what he should believe in.  Meanwhile with Liesel in The Book Thief, she was just a little girl who had gone through traumatic family experiences, and didn’t know how to read or write. This changes as she learns to read and write with the help of her foster father Hans Hubermann, and along with this she learns how to voice her opinions more openly and how to process her emotions and understandings regarding the situation with Hitler. 
                                                                  
Detail #2:  This can be connected to social justice as both start off somewhat clueless to the world around them, then realizing the harsh reality of racism and the treatment that comes with it can really affect not only their own lives, but the people around them. Liesel has her realization of hatred towards the Nazis and Hitler during the event of burning books written by Jews, and because of that she starts to connect the dots and starts to question if The Führer, referring to Hitler, was the cause of her grief to her biological mother, as well as the disasters happening on Himmel Street. Due to this Liesel steals a book from the burning pile called ‘Shoulder Shrug’ out of the anger and the darkness in her heart that starts enveloping her; this means that she has come to the realization of the effects Hitler has made throughout her life, and she starts to hate him as said in the book:                                       


Detail #3: Now as for Justyce, social justice can be taken to a different section as he first starts to realize there is some sort of racist inequality going on around his friend group. Justyce and his best friend Manny are both in a friend group with all privileged white boys named Jared, Kyle, Tyler, and Blake during their time in Braselton Preparatory Academy. Though there should  be nothing to worry about, Justyce very clearly starts to get disturbed once his friends start discussing with Manny about the social revolution that has changed over the centuries. The boys believe that they have an equal standing between all races, but yet the remarks they mark are very clearly disrespecting black people. The only reason they would even believe they have an equal opinion on races is due to the fact they are friends with Justyce and specifically Manny, since Manny was raised in a mostly white neighbourhood and grew up with money and privilege. It is only by chance that Manny had a similar background to those of Jared and the others, which otherwise like Justyce they would probably not see eye to eye with. 



Main Idea #3 Justice system 



Detail #1: Through social justice, a main reason as to why it may be so bad among communities and people is due to the influence of government’s actions. The government in both books, meaning both police and higher ups, have a very biased perspective on certain people groups, whether it be Jews (The Book Thief), or black people (Dear Martin). It’s disappointing to know that the leaders of countries and cities also have such a tight opinion on society, which ultimately shapes the minds of that entire population. An example of this would be in The Book Thief, where technically the entire reason of the plotline is due to the fact of Hitler’s Reign in Germany, and the events of that. Bombings, forced military assignments, as well as the Nazi’s attempt to eliminate all traces of Jews are all things that occur in Liesel’s perspective. This means that the justice system is being forced onto all the citizens in Germany, whether or not they believe it’s true, since they could lose their lives if they do not obey. 

Detail #2:  The difference with Dear Martin is that the way justice is handled is due to a more recent approach to racism. One example of that would be the situation with Justyce and Melo as discussed earlier, as well another example when an Officer called Tyson shoots Justyce and Manny, and ends up killing Manny in the process. Later in court, Tyson pleads that he is innocent for the shooting as he blames Justyce and Manny for ‘provoking’ him with their loud music, and that the boys also had a gun on them, which is obviously not true. This situation would probably not have happened if Justyce and Manny were white, and Justyce speculates that the cause of Tyson shooting them in the first place is because earlier Manny’s cousin Quan had been charged for murdering Officer Tyson’s police partner, Officer Castillo. It may have been for revenge, but either way the excuses Tyson was making in court were very clearly targeted towards a racial profiling pattern. 

Detail #3: 

The way the justice system impacts Dear Martin is different than in The Book Thief, as the way the government deals with situations regarding race have been implemented subtly throughout all of society, somewhat encouraging the horrible racist acts that occur during the novel. In comparison to The Book Thief, the Nazis and Hitler go on their own terms and try to extort their beliefs through the people of Germany. 


Conclusion 

Through the books of Dear Martin and The Book Thief, it is evident that social justice is a recurring theme in both. This could be an explicit or implicit method of showing it, may it be through the order of events in the novels, the main characters’ development, as well as how the justice system is handled. Nevertheless, racism and discrimination should never be validated. 