Name: Misia Lui 10B
/8 
Know What You Believe  
Chapter Five Study Questions 
Created by Dr. Alexander Philip 
1. Dr. Peter Singer, an atheistic moral philosopher at Princeton University, claims that killing  chickens or cows or pigs in order to consume their flesh is practicing “speciesism”  (discrimination based on an organism’s species) since one would never kill a human to consume  the human’s flesh. In light of Dr. Singer’s position, what does the Bible teach as being the  fundamental difference between humans and all other created beings? (2) 
In Genesis 1:26-27 it says “Then God said, “Let us make mankind in our image, in our likeness, so that they may rule over the fish in the sea and the birds in the sky, over the livestock and all the wild animals, and over all the creatures that move along the ground.” This is telling us that God created us from his own image, both male and female, meaning the men were made to rule over all other creations. We have a moral and a spiritual sense as well as self consciousness. This is the fundamental difference between humans and all other created beings. 
2. Identify at least four separate consequences of Adam and Eve’s disobedience which carry  through until today. (2) 
We lost our original inclination towards God 
The image of God was badly marred in both its moral and natural dimensions 
Our intellect became bound, our emotions corrupted, and our will enslaved 
Our desires inclined away from our creator 
3. Because of Adam and Eve’s disobedience, future generations of humans are “Totally Depraved.”  Explain what Total Depravity does not mean. Then explain what Total Depravity does mean. (2)
Total depravity does not mean that man/Adam is bad and he might be the very trace of sin for all mankind and the original root of sin. 
Total depravity does mean to tell us that the evil principle of sin has invaded every part of human nature.
Total depravity does not mean humans are as bas as he possibly can be and that eeyr

4. Compare and contrast the legacy of the first Adam with the legacy of Jesus of Nazareth (the  “second” Adam). (2)

Adam brought sin into the world, while Jesus died for our sins. Adam made us all guilty to sin, while Jesus allowed us to be forgiven. 














