Misia Lui
(437) 488-7233
misia.lui@245renfrewdrive.ca

Sunday, October 30, 2022

Aritzia LP, A-OK Cafe 
5000 Hwy 7, Markville Mall
Markham, ON L3R 4M9

Dear Hiring Committee, 
 
I am writing to you to express my interest in your part-time position as a barista in the A-OK Cafe inside Aritzia.  I am currently a Grade 10 high school student at Peoples Christian Academy in Markham, Ontario. I’ve always had an interest in making drinks for others, as well as having good baking skills, which is why when I saw your listing on indeed.com, I was immediately determined to get this job. I believe that adding a cafe inside Aritzia was a very smart idea, as there are many clothing choices within the store, and if someone is waiting instead of waiting around, they can get a drink or snack while being nearby. Working at such a cafe would give me the opportunity to serve many customers within the comfort and convenience of their surroundings. 

I believe that I would be an amazing addition to baristas in the A-OK Cafe. I am organized and can manage my time well, so as I am still in high school, managing my schedule will be very important for me. I know basic skills on how to make coffee during my time doing community service work, and I have fairly good cooking/baking skills. Of course a job as a barista isn’t just that, but I’m sure I can manage very well. My communication skills are excellent, and I believe that will be a very crucial part of a barista, as I would have to give the customers wonderful service, as well as answering any questions they have. With all of this in mind, if I become one of your baristas, I promise you will be employing only the best. I’m attentive and detail oriented and believe I can make the experience of an Aritzia cafe perfect for all customers. 

Thank you for considering me for this position. I am looking forward to learning new things and helping the company grow. I welcome any further discussion about my interests or abilities and am available for an interview at your convenience.

Respectfully yours, 
Misia Lui 

