The War at Home - Canada during the Great War

Fill in the table below using your textbook as a source of information.

Answer the following questions using your textbook as a source of information.

1. What country, according to Sir Wilfred Laurier, was Canada’s “mother country”?

Great Britain

2. How many troops set out for England on October 3, 1914?

Over 30,000 troops. 




3. Identify TWO reasons why a young man might have enlisted in 1914.

For the adventure, and because if they didn’t, those around him would call him weak and useless. 

4. Why did so many Aboriginal men enlist in the war effort?

They believed that it would be an opportunity in order to break through their set barriers as well as reclaim their title as warriors from before.

5. Explain the idea of Victory Bonds.

It was a system in order to be a loan to the government during the war in order to support them as well as other resources needed to be provided, and didn’t raise taxes that much which was a good way to make sure that inflation was not able to create chaos etc. After 5-20+ years you could reclaim the money and your savings would’ve increased by a lot.

6. Explain the negative side of propaganda.

Though it brings to our attention that it can make us make decisions about propaganda much easier and to see the benefits, propaganda is generally a negative thing due to the fact it toys with our emotions and thoughts in a way. They specifically target specific groups in which the opinion might not even be correct just to manipulate the general public. This can be disguised as a good thing usually.  

7. Who did the War Measures Act label as “enemy aliens”?

These people were people who were already at war with the British but had stayed in Canada for most of their time. It could also be referred to as more foreign places generally like Bulgaria, Germany, Japan, Italian, etc. 

8. Why did Berlin, Ontario, change its name to Kitchener?

Because during that time an “anti-german sentiment” was growing which brought attention to many.

9. Which women got the vote as a result of the Wartime Elections Act?

 Wives/widows, mothers, and sisters of soldiers serving overseas.

10. How many Canadians joined the military as a result of conscription?

Around 400,000+.