01: Defining the Basics

What is human cloning?

Human cloning originates from the concept of gene cloning. This involves manipulating DNA in a genome in order to create a genetically identical copy of wherever the DNA initially had been produced. In this case, human cloning is the process of creating a genetically identical copy of a human.

How is This Process Created?

Two ways: SCNT and by embryo splitting through IVF

Through SCNT procedure, otherwise known as somatic nuclear transfer, it is first required that there are two parties: a female’s uterus that includes an egg, and the nucleus of the somatic cell of another donor. Once these two parties are confirmed, the main procedure of human cloning begins. The nucleus extracted from a somatic (body) cell of the intended cloned individual (aka the donor) replaces the nucleus of the original egg. Once both the donor’s nucleus and the original egg cell fuse, they could either die out of incompatibility, or begin to duplicate rapidly through meiosis. If the process is successful, these cell clones would be implanted into a surrogate mother. If further development occurs, the birth of a human clone will occur. 
A small disclaimer is that through human cloning, the result may not be identical to the nucleus donor if the original egg cell came from someone else. The only way a clone would look identical (or atleast identical genetic material) would be if both the cell and the transferred somatic cell were both from the same individual. 
Embryo splitting through in vitro fertilization (IVF) is the process of joining sperm and egg outside of the female's body to create a zygote. The zygote, which will now be commonly referred to as an embryo, splits into two and eventually four identical cells. At this point, the cells can be divided and allowed to grow into distinct but similar blastocysts (a cluster of dividing cells made by a fertilized egg), can then be inserted into a woman's uterus.





Next Slide 

Through this, we must still understand that it is not actually possible to completely clone a human, and have a life size version of you walking alongside you. The closest to human cloning that has been discovered as of now is still only through therapeutic or reproductive cloning. 
Therapeutic: used to grow new tissues and/or muscles, usually used to treat diseases
Reproductive: used to produce genetically identical organisms (acts as a supply vessel for the original DNA provider)

02: Weighing Both Sides

Pros:
Increase in genetic research allows a more wide variety of scientific information that can be released to the public, and possibly learned as common knowledge (ONLY KNOWLEDGE, NOT PRACTICE.)
Scientists can manipulate genes in order to have the human traits attuned to your desire. 
More income and job opportunities in the future. Advancement also means more possibilities in accessible technology.
Those who are infertile may use human cloning in order to produce a child 
Organ transplants take forever to be available, and are especially expensive and difficult to access. With human cloning, this issue may be solved
Cons:
The bad side of this is that people may start to bring humans to life just for the sole purpose of harvesting their organs, or stripping them of nutrients and blood cells for the original DNA holder (Basically a vessel). Many might question if this is infringing on human rights. 
All outcomes of human cloning are made artificially and may not be ethical in terms of society.
So far in research, all successful clones results ended up only living for a little while before their systems failed them. 




03: Societal Relevance
As described previously, there are definitely many pros in why people support human cloning, but also many cons. Another issue that stands within the economical/ social world is the use of money. The whole concept of gene cloning, especially human cloning, is a topic that is heavily researched to this day and requires a lot of funds in order to do so. Yes, it is true that the benefits of human cloning are powerful, but is it powerful enough to say it is THAT necessary considering the amount of money put into it? It is possible the money spent on research and experimenting alone may as well overmine the initial results.

04: Personal Opinions
Considering all the information discussed, I would personally be on the opposing side of the human cloning controversy. If we were weighing out both pros and cons, the cons are simply more powerful than the pros that would come out of human cloning. The world is advancing rapidly in every way, meaning that there can definitely be other alternatives in the future which would be safer rather than establishing such a risky procedure. It not only goes against human rights, but as we are humans, humans tend to overuse the information and resources they have and end up corrupting it. An issue such as human cloning could only be normalized if it was simply just therapeutic cloning to regenerate extra cells, tissues, etc.


























