Living On One Dollar Assignment
1. What were your views on poverty before watching the video?
My views on poverty before the video were just that people had extremely limited money and could barely afford essential everyday items. 
2. What are your views on poverty after watching the video?
My views on poverty after watching the video were that I was just lookin at the basic definition, when in reality it’s so much harder than that. People in poverty have to experience so much hardship such as health problems, and living conditions. Seeing those two go into such a different world from where they leave truly showed me how hard it is when you are in poverty. 
3. How does poverty and economics have a link, in your opinion, using things we have
learned in class and also your personal opinions?
Poverty and economics have a link, because if the majority of people in poverty have poor health, the economy will decline. As well as education and employment rates, because these elements heavily influence the economy.  This means that if the economy grows, that will reduce poverty.
4. Do you think the wealthier economic community has a responsibility to help those in
economic need to get out of poverty? Why or why not? In your opinion, what are some
ways in which ‘richer’ countries can help?
I think it is their choice. Wealthier economic communities should have the option to help economies who are in poverty, but it shouldn’t be mandatory. They should have control over their own riches, and especially because it is their wealth, they can choose what to do with it. Some ways that richer countries can help would be sending people from their country to the poorer countries and help. Such as for education and jobs, sending experienced qualified people to train and teach the people would greatly help their future for the long run. 
5. What are ways in which you can respond to help others in need?
There are many ways to help others in need. Firstly, it depends on the situation the person is in; for example poor people living on the streets, buying them a meal/donating money or giving them a few words of encouragement would already help them greatly. If it’s in general, responding to others in need you would naturally want to help them in any way you can. Sometimes people can have physical or mental problems as well, and during that it’s best to just support them with words during that period. 
