Reason for God Chapter 1

Chapter 1: There Can’t Be Just One True Religion
1. Keller says he has often asked non-Christians, “What is your biggest problem with Christianity? What troubles you most about its beliefs or how it is practiced?” [p. 3] 
One of the biggest things were historical instances of violence or oppression carried out in the name of Christianity. If christianity is in the name of the Lord, all insulting instances should not be using Christ’s name in vain. As well as conflicts between certain Christian doctrines and scientific theories, that topic of discussion is always a tricky one. 

2. Keller agrees with the notion that religions claiming exclusivity of their beliefs are a barrier to world peace [p. 4] Do you agree with Keller? Do you find his agreement surprising? Can you understand why exclusivity can be a concern of many in our culture?
	I agree with Keller. This is because a true religion should not be claiming exclusivity and be able to be open to anyone who is willing. I do not find this agreement surprising. It is understandable why many in our culture are concerned about exclusivity, given the potential for division and conflict; it definitely has the potential of growing a barrier to world peace, and ultimately unity.
3. Define, as objectively and carefully as possible, the three approaches to try to deal with the divisiveness of religion: to outlaw it [p. 5-6], to condemn it [p. 7-13], and to restrict it to the private sphere of life [p. 13-18]. Where have you noticed or encountered such approaches? What does Keller identify as the flaw in each approach? Do you agree they are flaws? 
The three approaches to deal with religious divisiveness are:
Outlawing religion: Attempts to eradicate religious belief through legal means.
Condemning religion: Stigmatizing religious beliefs and exclusive claims.
Privatizing religion: Keeping religious beliefs out of the public sphere.
I have noticed such approaches in autobiographies of missionary books where there are churches that put restrictions on the general public and rules such as these. Keller identifies flaws in each approach: Outlawing religion often intensifies belief and leads to more dangerous ideologies, condemning religion is inconsistent, as it makes its own exclusive truth claims, and privatizing religion fails to recognize that everyone brings their worldview into public discourse. I agree with these flaws.
4. “Ironically, the insistence that doctrines do not matter is really a doctrine itself” [p. 8]. What is a good, winsome way to present this truth to a skeptic without seeming arrogant or insensitive or offensive?
A winsome way to present this truth that "the insistence that doctrines do not matter is really a doctrine itself" might be to gently suggest that everyone holds beliefs about the nature of reality, and to invite a discussion about the foundations of different worldviews.
5. Given the refutation of the “story of the blind men and the elephant” [p. 8-9], how do we make this argument while maintaining the humility appropriate to knowing we see only in part, through a glass darkly (see 1 Corinthians 13)?
While it is true that we are all technically blind men feeling one part of the elephant, we can maintain humility by acknowledging our own limitations while still respectfully presenting reasons for our beliefs. We can emphasize that while we may not have perfect knowledge, we believe there are good reasons to trust in the Christianity worldview.
6. Keller says, “The reality is that we all make truth-claims of some sort and it is very hard to weigh them responsibly, but we have no alternative but to try to do so” [p. 11]; “We are all exclusive in our beliefs about religion, but in different ways” [p. 13]. How do you weigh your truth-claims? 
	People will always have differing viewpoints on religion, and there is no way to avoid them. It is important to listen to others and understand where their head is at when it comes to truth-claims; and while it is difficult to discern whether it is valid or not, it is important to acknowledge that it is possible that your own truth claims may be derogatory to others as well. 
7. Because “all of us have fundamental, unprovable faith-commitments that we think are superior to those of others,” Keller argues that we must ask, “which fundamentals will lead their believers to be the most loving and receptive to those with whom they differ?” [p. 19-20]. What “fundamentals” would apply to Christians? Why do so many Christians tend to act as if such fundamentals do not apply to them, since they are neither loving nor receptive?
	Christian fundamentals that should lead to loving and receptive behavior could be the doctrine of the image of God in all humans, the belief in universal sin (prevents a sense of superiority), salvation by grace (produce humility), and many Christians may act unlovingly due to a lack of understanding or application of these core teachings. A reason why Christians tend to act as if such fundamentals do not apply to them might be due to pride. 
8. Does it shock you when Keller says that Christians should expect to find nonbelievers who are “much nicer, kinder, wiser, and better than they are”? [p. 19].
	Keller probably said this due to the fact that many Christians are very conservative in comparison to those who may not believe. When there are people who do not have an opinion, they are more open to suggestions and different aspects from their own, whereas sometimes Christians may feel that they have everything they need and shut themselves off from other words of opinions. 
9. Review the title of this chapter—does Keller fully answer this question, or does he primarily level the playing field for conversations with skeptics? 
The chapter title "There Can't Be Just One True Religion" is not fully answered by Keller. Instead, he primarily levels the playing field for conversations with skeptics by showing that everyone holds exclusive beliefs and that Christianity has unique aspects for peace and unity.