Fish Cheeks

Read the short story "Fish Cheeks" and write three paragraphs in response:

1. Explain how the story would be different if it were written from the perspective of Amy's mother instead of Amy. 

In Amy’s mother’s perspective, the story would be different due to how she would’ve slowly understood the situation Amy was in. Instead of the main aspect of the story focusing on Amy’s uncomfortable atmosphere, it would be focusing on her mother’s suffocating situation on how awkward the dinner was. It would be imagined that her mom was aware of her daughter’s feelings for the minister’s son, so she tried her best to cook the best food and welcome them into their home. Instead, during the course of the dinner Amy’s mom would start to realize that the reason why Amy has been so anxious wasn’t about being scared of seeing her crush, but embarrassed on how their way of eating dinner and all their personal habits were much different to the minister’s family due to different cultures. Not knowing how to fix everything during the dinner, Amy’s mom would continue to be a good host until the minute they left, and once they did, she then expressed everything she told her from the original text. 

2. Explain how this mental exercise in perspective (i.e. putting ourselves in someone else's shoes) would help Amy to forgive her mother and father for doing things that made her feel uncomfortable.

Everyone has different perspectives on many scenarios, and specifically for this one, it is very clear that Amy was uncomfortable and embarrassed of her family. Putting herself in her parents shoes, she would have realized that although their tendencies may seem weird to the outer public, they tried their best to make their guests comfortable in their own way, and realizing that her mother cooked her all her favorite foods helped her notice that. The difference between Amy and her parents would be that her parents aren’t ashamed of their culture, but quite the opposite and thought it was the perfect way to express their form of gratitude. 


3. Answer the question under 'METACOGNITION' on page 17. Think about logical connections between people's character, personality, background or status, and how they behave or interact. (i.e. I infer that Mrs. Tan is not a permissive parent because she...)

It was quite obvious how Amy was acting, showing discomfort and such, all the way from the first meeting at dinner to the very end. One would assume that Amy was only being quite due to the fact she had a crush on Robert, but instead it was to show her humiliation towards her family’s customs. We can tell this because throughout the course of the story, for example when Amy’s dad belched at the end of the meal, one outside of chinese customs would assume it is quite odd, which is what Amy was thinking as well, which caused her to go completely silent the rest of the meal. Amy’s mom probably picked up on the signs and understood what Amy was feeling because of that. 