Act 1, Scene 1-2
What has recently happened to Olivia? How long will she mourn?
What country are we in? 
“If music be the food of love, play on...”

This first line of the play is a very famous one. What does the line make you think of? How might it be an introduction to the rest of the play? Why is there a comparison between music and love?

In this opening scene, we are introduced to Duke Orsino and his love for Olivia.    How would you describe each of these characters? In what ways are their situations similar? How is their behaviour alike? Would you consider it “healthy” behaviour?
Describe Viola’s personality and character based on what you know so far.
Why would Viola disguise herself as a young man while she is in Illyria? What uncertainties would she face as a woman in a strange land?

Act 1, Scene 3
Do you like Sir Toby, Sir Andrew and Maria? Do you approve of their behaviour? What aspects of their behaviour might be offensive to some people?
What about this scene makes it an example of low comedy?

Act 1, Scene 4
Who is Cesario? What mission is the Duke sending Cesario on? 
Dramatic irony occurs when the audience knows something of which some or all of the characters onstage are unaware. In this scene, the dramatic irony is found in Orsino’s praise of Cesario’s “feminine” qualities. Find two examples of dramatic irony in this scene.

Act 1, Scene 5
1. What is one of the jokes/jests the fool tries on Olivia to lighten her spirits? How does he prove her the fool with this jest?
2. How might Orsino attract Olivia’s attention if it were today? Give three different examples.
What is Malvolio like?  Describe him. 
How is Viola "Not what she seems"? What is the problem that Viola is in?
What is Olivia's developing problem?
How many compliments can you find?  List two puns that Viola says to Olivia.  

Act 2, Scene 1
What has happened to Sebastian?  Who has helped him? 
Time is somewhat relative in this play. When should the scene with Sebastian really occur? Why doesn't it (a very practical reason). 




Act 2, Scene 2
A soliloquy is a speech in which a character thinks aloud while alone on stage. It is intended to reveal the thoughts and feelings of the speaker to the audience. Reread Viola’s soliloquy in this scene (lines 16-40).  Why does Olivia give Viola her ring? 
Respond to the following statement: “The frailty of women will forever prevent them from begin the equals of men.”  What do you think? 
Record your impressions of Malvolio. What  do you learn about his character in this scene?  

Act 2, Scene 3
Reread the confrontation between Malvolio and the partiers (lines 82 – 117). With whom do you sympathize the most and why? 
What is it about Malvolio that makes Maria and her friends want to plot revenge against him?
What is your impression of Maria’s plan? Will it be good fun or cruel embarrassment? Would you go along with it? Why or why not?

Act 2, Scene 4
What does the Duke send Viola to do? How does Viola answer him?
 How does Orsino define male love? How did Olivia describe male love two scenes ago? 
What sad thought does Viola tell Orsino? What does she say that almost reveals her secret?  What literary device does this use? 
Why do you think Viola has fallen in love with Orsino? What exactly are the features of his character or personality that Viola admires? What is her definition of love?  Is it the same as Orsino’s definition?  
Do you think that the emotion and experience of love are the same for both men and women? Do men and women define love in the same way? What attracts women to men? What attracts men to women? What is the relationship between attraction and love?

Act 2, Scene 5
What is Malvolio imagining himself doing? 
How is the hooking of Malvolio like the catching of a fish? 
What 4 instructions does the letter give to Malvolio?
How will Olivia react to these instructions? 











Act 3, Scene 1
What does Viola say to compliment the fool? 
What are some of the word games Viola plays with Olivia?
In Shakespeare’s play, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, Helena, who is one of the unhappy heroines in the play, laments the woman’s role in courtship and she says,

“We cannot fight for love, as men may do; / We should be woo’d and are not made to woo.”

In Twelfth Night, Olivia is bold enough to reject this gender role restriction. Make some notes examining the traditional rules of courtship (dating back in the day), why these roles existed, and whether there are any remnants of these roles in our society today.


Act 3, Scene 2
How does Toby try to convince Andrew of Olivia's love for him?
What is Andrew going to do? 
Sir Toby and Fabian’s “abuse” of Sir Andrew may be compared to the abuse of Malvolio earlier in the play. Construct a chart in which you compare the two events. Heading should include the following:

Motivations of the perpetrators
The “weakness” of the victims
The hatching of the plots
The use of letters to trick the victims

Do you sympathize with either of the victims? Is one of the practical jokes more fun and light-hearted than the other? Is one more mean-spirited and hurtful than the other? Explain your answers.


Act 3, Scene 3
Why is Antonio in danger in the town?
What does Antonio give Sebastian his purse?
This short scene reinforces the positive image of Antonio as a loyal and loving friend. Why might Shakespeare want to emphasize the “goodness” of such a seemingly minor character? 
Sebastian and Viola are now in the same city, dressed exactly alike. They are twins who look very much the same. Predict what will happen next in the play based on this information and consider the long- term consequences of these events.






Act 3, Scene 4

What is wrong with Olivia at the beginning of this scene? Why does she want Malvolio?
What does Malvolio look like and how does he act around Sir Toby?
What things in Olivia's banishment does Malvolio get hope from?
How does Malvolio’s soliloquy (lines 62-81) reveal that he deceives himself as much as the others have deceived him? How, in particular, does he misinterpret Olivia’s reactions to support his belief in her affection for him?
Again in this scene, Viola is forced to deal with society’s expectations of the male role she has assumed. As a “gentleman,” she must defend her honour according to an unwritten code of male behaviour.  What attitudes, values and actions does this code require? And what similar codes/rules are there today for males? For females? Do you think that these modern rules are fair, appropriate and useful? If not, compose a list of rules that you would support.
What is Toby's plan?
How does Toby describe Andrew?
How does Toby's plan get upset?
At the end, what does Andrew decide to go and do?


Act 4, Scene 1
Sebastian asks, “Are all the people mad?” (lines 26-27).  Reread this short scene and consider the actions of Sebastian with Feste, then with Sir Andrew, and finally with Olivia. How does each character confuse and baffle Sebastian? 
The humour of Sir Andrew’s second encounter with Cesario depends very much on gender role stereotypes. Why is Andrew so surprised when Cesario/Sebastian returns his punches? What had his earlier “fight” with Cesario/Viola led him to expect? 


Act 4, Scene 2
What does Feste dress up as? Is he thrilled to do it?
Feste’s portrayal of a clergyman pokes fun at the assumed solemnity and pomposity of some churchmen.  Do you agree with this act?  Is it accurate or could it be seen as a satire? 
What is Malvolio's attitude in the prison?


Act 4, Scene 3
Is this a necessary scene? If you were directing a version of the play, would you keep this scene or omit it? Explain the reasons for your decision.



Act 5, Scene 1
Indignation, the feeling of being wronged or unjustly treated, is one of the strongest human emotions. What motivates Antonio’s indignation in this scene? Would he have expected Sebastian to treat him differently? If so, why?
“I’ll sacrifice the lamb that I do love, / To spite a raven’s heart within a dove.” (lines 126-127)
In this scene, Orsino is another character who feels betrayed by someone close to him. What other emotions magnify his anger to the point where he threatens to kill the one he loves? Which (if any) emotions are justified? How do you account for his sudden reversal of intention when he discovers that Olivia and Sebastian are married?
Sir Toby is another character who expresses a sense of indignation in this scene. Why does he blame his injury on Sir Andrew? What does this reveal about him? What advice would you offer Sir Toby on personal relationships?
How many marriages are there and who gets married? 
“I’ll be revenged on the whole pack of you.” (line 370)
How does Malvolio’s threat introduce a sour note to the otherwise harmonious resolution of the play? How does it provide a touch of realism to an otherwise too-good-to-be-true ending? What does this reveal to you about Shakespearean comedy?

