Rights Article Assignment

Goal: Find a published article where a right was being taken away. 
https://globalnews.ca/news/9392572/metis-indigenous-rights-canada-2023/

Identify whether the right was a human right, or a legal right and explain why. (2 mark)

The right that was being taken away was when the Metis people were forced into residential schools by the government and stripped of their culture, ultimately trying to convert them to their own ways instead. This means their human rights were taken away. 

Find two other examples throughout history of this right being violated (2 mark)

Violence against Indigenous women and children. Specifically women and children because back then, women were not as respected until later on. And the fact the Indigenous were classified as the poorer side of people, it was very common for others to constantly act disrespectful towards them, as well as physical, mental, and even sexual abuse. 
To have religious freedom. Before, and even now, many who believe a certain religion, have been outcasted and ridiculed for believing what they do. When this first became a problem, people who held a religious belief could potentially get killed, kicked out of their community, and much more. 

What can the UN do to further protect this right from being violated in the future? (2 marks)

The UN has already done a few things to protect human rights, such as in 1984 
There was a new movement called the “universal declaration of human rights” which ultimately included how there should be freedom from discrimination, and equality throughout everyone, as well as everyone having the right to have basic necessities. Though this law has been established, there are still many incidents in which there is a lot of discrimination and other things as well. To further protect this right from being violated in the future, they can continue to send out peacekeeping operations and peace building missions. This might impact the violation little by little, but a lot still has to be done about human rights, and the government can’t help with everything. The public also needs to cooperate and fight.  


Is this right also seen in the Canadian Charter of Human rights? Where can it be found? If not, should it be added, why or why not? (2 mark)

Yes. If you search up the Canadian Charter of Human Rights, human rights will go into detail in section 7. It says: 

Life, liberty, and security of a person. Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. Guarantees the life, liberty and personal security of all Canadians.

Does this right follow the common good in a democratic society? Why or why not? (2 marks)

Yes it does. This is because human rights are something everyone is born with and not related to the law. The common good is something that is beneficial to the community as a whole, meaning that since human rights have been disrespected and treated not the best since a long time ago, having a law that can help hold the slander together a little better would be beneficial for everyone, as everyone should be respected. 

Find a person throughout history who has fought for this right. Explain their influence and how they helped protect this right. (2 marks)

Martin Luther King Jr. Yes, he did fight for civil rights, and mainly for black people’s right to vote. As well as regarding the discrimination others have gone through just because of race, and labour rights. 

Total Marks: 12


