True Colours Skit 
Misia Lui 10B

Group member: Yi Joon, Renee, Toby, Julian

A brief explanation of your character in the skit (What True Colour is represented by your character? How does this character demonstrate the qualities of their True Colour? What was it like writing for a character with a True Colour that was different from your own?)

The character I play in our skit is one of the children of Julian and Yi Joon. The color that the Misia in the skit represents is blue, which is the color that is considerably the opposite to my real colour, gold (at least according to the quiz).  
Throughout the skit, my character is a little slow and a light hearted child. During the conflict scenes, though she is a child and probably doesn’t understand much, she tries her best to split up her parents’ fighting and might as well be the reason why the storyline had an ending to begin with. While all the chaos the Misia in the skit would be described as a comedic relief, and though her appearance isn’t frequent, I could say she leaves an impression. This is why blue is the perfect colour for this character.
While writing for this character, which is the opposite of my own colour, I would honestly say it wasn’t hard at all. The reason behind this is because when I was younger I’m pretty sure I was blue, up until maybe a year or two ago. All I had to do was think back to how I would say stuff then and incorporate it into my character’s script, and then it was fine. 
























Julian: Mother
Misia: Caring child
Renee: Nerd child
Joon: Baby daddy
Toby: Neighbour/Narrator

Narrator/tobyy: This story starts with a married couple with two children

Julian: I love you

Joon: I love you too

Narrator: except this couple was arguing

Julian: WE ARE RUNNING OUT OF MILK!!!!

Joon: What am I supposed to do about that!

Julian: GET US SOME MORE

*throws milk carton at joon*

Narrator: And so he went to get milk, but he took very long. So Julian Misia and Renee just waited and waited and waited.

Misia: Where’s dad?

Julian: Don’t worry he’s coming soon

Renee: Actually. He’s been gone for 1826 days and 6 hours.

Julian: How do you know that? You were 2 when he left!

Renee: I have been calculating his absence from the moment he stepped out the door.

Narrator: Julian had to take care of his two children for 5 years

*Julian being sad while waiting for Joon with his 2 kids for 5 years

Joon: I’m back

Julian: JOON is that really you?

Joon: Of course and I have milk

Renee: PAPA! ITS BEEN 1826 DAYS AND 8 HOURS!!

Julian: Oh joon… HOW COULD YOU!!! YOU LEFT US FOR 5 YEARS TO GET MILK!!

Joon: IT WAS REALLY HARD AND AT LEAST I CAME BACK

Julian: Well yeah but- IS THAT CHOCOLATE MILK???

Joon: Yes, I went to our usual grocery store but they ran out of milk so I followed the delivery truck and ended up 10,000 km away from our house to cross the border in order to get the best milk, but then I went into the land of Milkonto and got arrested for following the delivery truck. I fought my case with the best lawyer I could find to finally get this chocolate milk.

Misia: Wow really! THANK YOU SO MUCH

Julian: JOON MISIA CAN’T DRINK CHOCOLATE

Misia: I CAN TRY

Renee: Actually. Since you are allergic to chocolate, your immune system will attack the microscopic chocolate molecules and will  cause an allergic reaction. This will lead to functional dyspepsia, or a stomach ache. This will cause you to defecate or as the cool kids say, “poop”.

Joon: The chocolate milk was cheaper and better quality

Julian: OUR FAMILY IS MORE IMPORTANT THAN CHOCOLATE MILK

Joon: WOW IM FEELING LIKE MY AMAZING EFFORT ISN’T BEING APPRECIATED HERE

Julian: YEAH NO FREAKING CRAP YOU IDIOT

Toby: Excuse me, I’m your next door neighbour and I overheard your argument. I was thinking that first off, I think that your marriage is flawed and you are both bad people.

Renee: Wow! This guy has done his research!

Toby: Joon I think that you are extremely stupid and the fact that you didn’t just go to a different store, and instead followed a truck with things you don’t even know has milk in it. 

Renee: This guy has amazing points!

Toby: I think that in my extremely relevant and important opinion, you should overlook this and become a happy family, and hopefully your stupidity will not kill you guys. 

Misia: Mom, dad, I agree with the next door creepy neighbour.. please don’t fight I don’t want you guys to divorce!! 

*whispers to renee* 

Misia: They’re not actually going to separate right..?

Renee: Statistically, almost 50% of couples in the United States divorce. Please do not become part of the statistics papa and mama. 

Misia: *walks over to the neighbour and pulls his arm up* 

*Love Maybe from business proposal plays

Misia: This is a protest! Stay together and say I love you right this instant! We shall fix this broken family and become beautiful once and for all.

Joon: *sigh* Alright, I love you Julian and I missed you a lot. I thought about you everyday when I was in jail. I hope you know that everyday I thought about you in jail

Misia: Good. MOTHER. SAY YOU LOVE HIM BACK. 

Julian: I love you too and I missed you too. I was waiting for you to come back, all this time and I never doubted you.

*about to kiss

Toby: Wow I can’t believe we’re such a happy family!

*Everyone looks at Toby weirdly

Misia: You aren’t in our family…

Renee: I guess he is now.

*group hug

