



STUDENT NAME: Misia Lui GLC2O

On the Main page, click on the Assessments button in the menu bar at the top of the page, and then click on the Career Matchmaker link.

Enter the DATE as your title, then click on Start Now! Read the instructions on the Introduction page, then click Start!

Answer the questions. (Do your best! The more thought you put into these answers, the better your results will be. If you need more information about a question, click on the More Info button beside the question.)

After you answer the first 39 questions, you will come to the Career Suggestions which lists the careers that are suitable for you based on your responses to the questions.

We strongly suggest that you answer the second round of questions as well. Click on the blue Answer More Questions link in the Improve Results section on the right side of the Career Suggestions page. Answer as many additional questions as you can, and then click the gray View Career Suggestions So Far button to see your updated list of career suggestions.







Click on one of the suggested careers of interest to you. 
(Those near the top are your best matches!)

Career: 	Psychologist 


1. Read the Suitable For You? information that appears for the career you have chosen. Answer the following questions:

What are the Central Aspects of this career?

 The central aspects of this career is to observe the feelings, views, and behaviour of others, as well as helping people with emotional and psychological problems. 

What are the Central and Secondary Aspects to which you answered Like or Like Very Much?

Helping people with emotional or psychological problems is something I like very much. As for the ones I chose, some include seeking out and analyzing information, helping others with their social and personal problems, and persuading and motivating other people, etc. 

Which, if any, did you answer Dislike or Dislike Very Much?

I chose dislike when coping with uncooperative or difficult people, as well as being interested in human biology. 





Click on the Back To Matchmaker Suggestions link near the top of the page.

Click on another career of interest to you.

Career: Criminal lawyer 


2. Read the SUITABLE FOR YOU? information that appears for this career.

Write down the Central and Secondary Aspects to which you answered Like or Like Very Much.

Providing advice, seeking out and analyzing information, asking questions and interviewing people, persuading and motivating other people, and presenting information and ideas in writing, etc. 

3. Click on JOB DESCRIPTION and WORKING CONDITIONS.

In the Job Description and Working Condition sections, try to find a job task or working condition that relates to two of the aspects you wrote down above.

Example

	Career: 		Website Designer
	Aspect: 		Having your own creative ideas about designs and styles
	Examples:		Designing computer websites
				Deciding on colours, patterns, layout, and graphics

For Your Career:


	Career:		Psychologist

        Aspect:		They diagnose and treat people affected by personal problems and mental disorders, and try to figure out how the mysteries of the mind affect human behavior.

        Examples:		Working in varying hospitals
			Working in correctional facilities


	Career: 		Criminal lawyer

        Aspect:		To defend or prosecute people accused of serious crimes, like murder or fraud, research and interviews, as well as work in the courtroom.

        Examples:		Some criminal lawyers work for the government as prosecutors 
			In order to play out their purpose to defend/prosecute people regarding crimes like murder, many criminal lawyers are also private investagators and detectives. 









Click on one of the two interviews. 

Person’s name: Norman 


4. Click on A DAY IN THE LIFE and BREAKDOWN OF ACTIVITIES.

See if you can find other examples of the aspects you have chosen in this person’s workday activities.


        Aspect:		Being organized and seeking out analyzed information

        Examples:		Checking telephone messages; making appointments; organizing schedules.

        Aspect:		 Asking questions and interviewing people, persuading and motivating other people

        Examples:		Two 1-hour appointments with clients: listening, asking questions, taking careful note




