LEARNING STYLES: REFLECTION JOURNAL

What is your preferred learning style?  Do you agree with the results?  Explain why you agree/disagree with the results, using specific example(s). 

My preferred learning style is auditory learning. I agree with the results because I can remember specific scenarios in which hearing was much easier to learn. When I study for tests I usually repeat the words I’m reading out loud over and over again, and it makes it easier to memorize. I also learn much better when there is a lecture happening, otherwise known as a teacher teaching us the information, instead of just reading off of a textbook.

Based on the Job Bank Canada website quiz, what was your percentage for:
Kinesthetic: 31%
Auditory: 94% 
Visual: 63%
Identify one activity per learning preference that you’ve encountered in school? 

Kinesthetic: Sometimes if I’m bored in class or stressing I would fidget with my pens in order to concentrate better.
Visual: When there are only words in an activity that’s going on I would picture pictures in my mind for me to understand better. 
Auditory: I find it common for me to repeat phrases my teachers say when they are teaching in class so I can process the information better. 

What is your weakest learning style?  Identify 2 strategies you can implement to enhance it.

My weakest learning style is kinesthetic. 2 strategies I can implement to enhance it is to try and make actions to memorize stuff, and try walking around and studying instead of just sitting down.

With consideration for your highest scoring learning preference, how can you alter your academic habits to foster greater academic success?  In your response, explain how you will better incorporate your preferred learning preference, especially in environments that do not cater to it.

With my highest scoring learning style (auditory), I can alter my academic habits by frequently reading out my work to see any error, study more efficiently by repeating information back to myself, as well as listening to music in order to concentrate. In environments where auditory learners will have difficulty applying their learning style, I can record any information given and listen to it later, as well as attentively giving participation whenever there is something I’m confused about.

Multiple Intelligences (MI) Reflection Journal


Personal Reflection:

What were your top two intelligences? Do you agree with the results of the quiz? Provide specific examples from your life to support your responses.

I am self smart and musical smart. I agree with the results of this quiz, because I can see specific examples of them in my life. Examples for music smart are how my parents, specifically my dad and all my instrument teachers have told me I have really good musical hearing; I didn’t really realize it at first though. I can also seem to perfectly memorize songs and tunes that intrigue me; and can sing from low to high octaves without being flat or sharp. As for being self smart, I agree with this because I’ve spent a lot of time just by myself, and overtime I’ve learned to analyze my own mind and the actions I’ve done daily; which apparently I’ve learned recently other people don’t do. Another example would be how the trial and error method works really well for me. It might take once or twice in order for me to understand where I went wrong, but eventually and pretty quickly, I can do things well. 


Take a look at the Multiple Intelligences Handout and see which careers are associated with your two highest intelligences. Pick one career that either surprised you or that you are interested in, and explain your reasoning.

The career I’ve chosen from the handout associated with my highest intelligences is being a psychologist. I’ve been very interested in that job recently. This is because I really enjoy evaluating people’s minds, as well as myself; which is corresponding to me being intrapersonal/ interpersonal. I find it interesting to look at the behaviors of how other people’s minds work, and compare them to mine; in order to see if they’re completely different or not. The reason I know this is because a few people actually come to me whenever they feel like they want to vent about whatever is on their minds, and usually I just listen to them and try to understand their feelings. I think this is a way to tell me that everyone in the world thinks differently, and in different perspectives than of your own, so you shouldn’t think that everyone should think like you. Other people’s minds might be more complicated than yours, or very simple.  


What were your lowest two intelligences? After looking through the “Practice” section of the website (link above), identify two strategies for each intelligence that you will use to strengthen these intelligences.

My two lowest intelligences are math and nature smart. 
For math smart, after looking at the practice section in the website, two strategies to strengthen this intelligence is:
Play games that require critical thinking.
Write the directions for completing a simple job like starting a car or tying a shoe.
	For nature smart, two strategies to strengthen this intelligence is: 
Spend time outside noticing patterns in nature.
Read books and articles about nature and the environment.
	
Do you believe there is value in understanding how you are smart? Explain. 

Yes, I think there is a value in knowing what type of smart you are. This is because ever since different types of smarts existed, it helped you identify what areas of study or just lifestyle may be better for you. Not knowing this and just living as if someone is “smart” or not may get you by, but you might never go to areas where you would be best fitted if you don’t understand how you are smart. 

How is Multiple Intelligences different from Learning Styles? Explain.

Multiple intelligences tell you in what areas you are smart, or basically how you are smart. While learning styles tell you which category you can learn better with. 





















Canada’s Smartest Person

If you competed in this episode, which test(s) do you think you could have won, and why? Which test do you think you would have struggled with and why? What did you learn about multiple intelligences by watching this show?

If I competed in this show, the tests I would’ve won would be the all  musical intelligence tests. I know this because I tried to do the challenges while the actual contestants did too, and I got them all correct (except for the one in the gauntlet since I can’t try it for myself). This is probably due to the fact that I apparently have “good musical hearing”. As for the tests that I would’ve struggled with, I think I would not do well in the physical performance tests, especially the one where you have to balance the blocks. I’m not exactly the most active person, and I don’t usually do amazing at gym tests at school, so assuming everything about myself, I wouldn’t do well at that. What I learned about multiple intelligences by watching this show was that I could clearly tell what intelligence strengths every person had. This tells me in an actual example how people can have strengths in different areas and still be the same amount of smart. 
































Which of the colours do you think are dominant for you? Which colour would you say you have the least of? 
Write a Journal reflection on how you have seen True Colours play out in your own life (Give an example). How have you seen your dominant colour characteristics affect you?
Taking a look at these slides, set a couple of goals for yourself around managing stress and time in the same Journal. Explain your goals.
The colours that are dominant for me are gold, blue, and orange. The colour I have the least of is green. 
Based on the slides, though the three colors I listed are the ones I relate to the most, I think the colour above all would be gold. With that in mind, the characteristics that correspond with gold such as “pay attention to class”, “accurate in how much time something is needed to do”, “prefer to work and finish one project at a time”, and “punctual” are the most relatable. All of the weaknesses for gold apply to me, especially when I have to do many many things at once with not much time; it stresses me out to the point where I get really frustrated. I eventually get it done but the process of it is not pleasant. 
In order to manage my stress, things I should work on is time management, spacing and scheduling everything, and keeping calm under pressure. If I can do this I will have no problem doing things efficiently and be able to reach success. 







				Five Love Languages 
My love language for both giving and receiving is physical touch. 

Reflection: A paragraph or so about how you receive love + the results of the quiz. Make sure to include an example from your life. 
	Even before I took the test I knew that my love language was physical touch. I love hugging people and sometimes if I’m bored I subconsciously just tap/poke their shoulder for no reason, it’s weird. I receive and give love as physical touch, and I think a reason why I’m usually so physically affectionate to the people around me is because I give people the same love I want back. When people hug me or are close to me I feel very safe and warm, and happy as well. Sometimes I can admit that I can sometimes hug people too much, but I’m guessing that means I really treasure that person. 

MBTI
Give an overview of your type in your OWN words.
Introverted, Intuitive, Feeling, and Judging is what INFJ represents. Usually people with this personality type are classified as an idealist and an advocate. This personality type is the rarest of the 16 types, with only 2% in the entire population of the world. The reason for it being so rare is due to the combination that INFJ stands for, because not many people can match it. INFJs value their relationships and when getting to know them they can make you feel safe, like “family”; and tend to want to learn the true meaning of the world and the reasoning behind the existence of mankind. Another reason as to why INFJ is particularly rare is because it contradicts itself, when it comes to how INFJs express themselves; the INF is more reliant on feeling and intuition which urges them to try and be more in tune with their feelings, but the J in INFJ completely repels the rest is it is more towards logical thinking/judgment. So it depends if these people choose to express their feelings, 50/50 chance. 
After reading through the following on the website, reflect on the portions you connect with for each of the following topics:
Strengths & Weaknesses
After reading the website on my MBTI type, some strengths that I strongly agree with are how they tend to be very aware of what other people are thinking regarding emotions and what they want, as well as how they are frequently able to anticipate what others are thinking or feeling since they are naturally empathic and in sync with those around them, due to the fact that INFJs value relationships very heavily. I agree that some of my strengths are my creativity, being insightful, and principled. A very big weakness that I have is how I try to maintain my relationships, but I sometimes withdraw all communication and block them off for a little, not because I’m suddenly not interested, but because if I continue to maintain the relationships too fast I can get an “overload”, because I’m too drained to hold the relationship. During that block period I sort of recharge myself by just spending time with only myself in order to feel more free, then once I feel in the better mental mindset I go straight back to my relationships with everyone. Whether or not some people understand how this works or not is their own problem.  
Career Paths
As an INFJ, using my abilities within this MBTI can put me in a job in any workplace (apparently). As for me, I agree that jobs involving helping and connecting with people would make me the happiest, as well as investigating the human mind. So counselors, therapists, psychologists would work just fine. I feel very rewarded when I can help others regarding their mental health, and surprisingly some of my friends call me their “free therapist”, so being a therapist might be one higher option. I agree that I am some sort of a “passionate communicator”, so a book writer might also interest me. “To be truly happy, however, they need to find work that aligns with their values and allows them some independence. Advocates crave opportunities to learn and grow alongside the people they are helping.” I would prefer to be in a job which only requires myself and my mind, while group settings aren’t ideal, that could work. 
Workplace Habits
I would like to say that I’m in some way sensitive to criticism, and after reading the workplace habits in INFJ, I can also agree that I hate it when I’m asked to redo something, especially if it’s not anything of importance. If I look at my personality and how I act on a daily basis, I would also agree when it says that I would usually pick up the unfinished work of others and try to help them finish it. “Advocate managers can be particularly stern if they catch someone behaving in a way that they consider unethical. These personalities have little tolerance for lapses in reliability or morality. When their employees’ good intentions match their own, however, Advocate bosses work tirelessly to ensure that their entire team feels valued, fulfilled, and successful.” This paragraph would be 100% accurate to myself, as I remember getting extremely frustrated when my classmates wouldn’t get such an easy concept. 
Relationships
“They are, in fact, sometimes mistaken for extroverts because they appear so outgoing and are so genuinely interested in people”. I’ve heard many times that people thought I was an extrovert, when in reality I’m just either really close with them or curious about their behaviors and want to learn more about them; being distant won’t help anything anyways. The INFJ personality cares very deeply about the relationships with others and tries to maintain the best, which is how I view my relationships as well.
Find a character you know (and like) from one of the slides or through a Google search of MBTI with your MBTI type, and explain the similarities you notice. For example, I might search MBTI “Bob’s Burgers” and see what comes up.

















    Transferable Skills 
1. Take point-form notes that include a few skills that you see in yourself under each transferable skill category (academic skills, teamwork skills, and personal management skills). Create a T-Chart (Left side: Skills you have, Right side: Examples)
Academic skills: Communication, thinking
Personal management skills: positive attitudes and behaviors, responsibility, adaptability 
Teamwork skills: work with others 
Academic skills I have 
Personal management skills I have 
Teamwork Skills

2. Include at least 1 goal for each category (a skill that you would like to develop further). You can consider each page a category.
Employability skills-  Manage my time better and don’t get sidetracked too much.
School skills- Understanding and identifying problems better and being able to find productive solutions.
Teamwork Skills- Being able to talk to more people better, outside of my own bubble of friends.








Journal: Social Media Presence
Please respond thoughtfully to the following questions in your Journal. Make sure to date and title your entry. Always place the most recent entry at the top of your Journal doc. Please do not use point-form.
What does your social media presence currently say about you?
My social media presence is currently under a private account, so only my friends, people I know, and some friends of friends can see what I post online. I don’t actually post on my account, instead, I post on my story (instagram), which lasts only 24 hours. This way people will only see what I post if they view it within 24 hours, so my presence on social media is only limited to people who view my story. 
Your digital footprint includes your online history - everything you leave behind as you use the Internet. How might your digital footprint influence your employer's, or a potential employer's, opinion of you?
A lot of my feed and search history on social media revolves around animation, figurines, rhythm games, and beaded jewelry posts, so depending on the person I could guess their impression of me would either be cool, or weird. There is no in between. 
Why might prospective and current employers want to know your social media handles or public usernames?
They would want our social media handles because now-a-days, almost everyone uses social media, and is active on it daily. Companies and current employers might want your handle to see who you are on a daily basis, so what you are like regularly, and if/if not if you have a bad reputation that might not be beneficial to the company. 
Before deciding to follow specific individuals or organizations on social media, why is it important to research who they are and determine what effect following them might have on how others perceive you? How might following them reflect negatively or positively on you or your values?
It really depends on the person you are following. There are some people who excessively check up on your status and stalk your every move, sometimes even more than you could ever imagine. Even as friends, you need to see how nosy or not nosy they might be if you follow them, and they follow you back. There are also some people who once you talk to them, they won’t stop the conversation and will waste a lot of your time. Again, there are many ways in which your followers can be annoying, but you just have to have judgment and see what’s best. 

Who is someone you follow on social media that you find has done a great job with their social media presence (this can be an organization as well)? Provide the platform used, a picture, and their handle. What about their digital footprint do you find positive? What is one thing you can learn from them, and how might you apply this to your own social media presence?
Someone who I think has done a great job with their social media presence is this korean actress named Kim Sejeong. Here is a few pictures from her instagram profile: 
 

Everyone has done or said something that has hurt another person. What are some factors that have contributed to your personal resilience and your ability to bounce back from stressful events or situations? If you have experienced issues involving your digital presence, what steps did you take to overcome those issues?

























