Obituary of Misia Lui 
October 24, 2007 - November 20, 2103

Today we are here to commemorate Misia Lui, a woman who left this world just a few days ago with a trace, at least for the people she knew.

In her early years, Misia wanted to be a scientist in chemistry; not sure how she knew this at the time but it was a dream that she would have all the way until right before highschool, until she started to take attention towards the behaviors of the human mind: specifically the people around her. Later on she also developed an interest in criminology, reading all the books she could find on it. But honestly, maybe one of the big reasons Misia went on to do what she did was because of her parents (deceased, but never forgotten, especially by Misia). Ever since she was a child, even when she wanted to be a scientist, her parents always told her that she should probably try and pursue law instead, due to the complicated excuses she would make whenever she would get in trouble or try and find her way out of something. Maybe they were just joking around, but she really did pursue law in the end. 

Throughout her lifetime, maybe the most common people that she mentioned were her parents. She loved them so much and had always said she was the person she was because of them. Misia had many countless people she knew that hadn’t had the best childhoods due to their parents, and she had felt very sorry for them and tried to comfort them in anyway she could; but as she listened to the stories these people told, she also felt very grateful for having such amazing parents that raised her with so much love and freedom. Which was why Misia loved saying “I love you” a lot; not just frequently to her parents, but it also became a habit for her friends that she cared for. 

She was a really quiet person, but as time went on Misia slowly became more and more social. It might not have been a great idea at first, but in the end it helped Misia get out of her comfort zone and found out many new opportunities in her life; whether it be making new friends, finding her perfect university major, or just enjoying her life to the fullest. Maybe becoming a more in front person was the reason why her autobiography book did so well. If it wasn’t already known, the book talked about all the people who made an impact on her life; and I’m sure half of those people wouldn’t be there if she hadn’t pushed herself to talk and say hi.

Misia was one of those people that had a comforting presence and tried her best to comfort those who came to her, though as I recall she hated it when people were clinging on to her all the time, which in a way was ironic. Though she lost contact with many of those people throughout her life, I hope she knew that she had a big impact in their lives. 

One last thing, Misia always wanted to find out if heaven and hell were real, if the afterlife existed, I hope she found out and is staying happily with the Lord. 




