To Nathan, who sent me two pictures and created a story for me that I had made up in less than two minutes of brainstorming 

There once was a boy named Nathan, a fragile little boy who didn’t have a dream of his own. One day on the news, as he sat down, crossing his little legs, and eating his favourite ice cream on a hot summer day, he watched the tv news as he saw a man with an incredible physique lift up a metal disk. The crickets of the summer weather croaked. Time went still as Nathan had an epiphany that would last a lifetime of possibilities. “I want to be that incredible one day, I must.” 

Time skip 

And so, because of this upcoming dream, Nathan worked hard to increase his stamina and strength, to aim for heights as high as lifting a metal disk in the playground. Many years have passed since his newly developed dream, and with this he had grown into a 16 year old boy with no drivers license and no money. Aside from this fact though, was that he had gained a strong mentally, along with enough physical strength that he believed he could finally do what he wanted all these years, since that hot summer day where dreams were made. 
Nathan knew his moment was coming, to show the world his dream and his hopeful achievement which would lead to endless possibilities in the future. Just like the man who lifted the metal disk many years ago, Nathan called the news reporters to come to that very same park to document a new moment in history. 
…
People started gathering on the playground equipment, as well as on nearby intersections to watch the incredible moment that was voiced through Nathan. The pressure he was feeling did not help this case, but he was determined to create history and make his dreams come true. Otherwise he would have done this for nothing. As people started chanting, “Nathan! Nathan! You can do it, Nathan!”. Confidence flowed into his body once again. Hands were now on the disk, as the metal that radiated heat from the summer sun touched his skin, Nathan truly believed he was now connected to it. And so he started to pull the disk. 

Everything went silent. The cheers were muted. Nathan could see people hyping him up, but he couldn’t hear it. That’s really weird. A strange ringing in his ear developed that grew to a large noise only he could hear. What did this mean? What in the world is happening. Nathan could feel his fingertips start to burn from the metal disk, his strength weakening. Did this mean he wasn’t lifting it up? Nathan's arms were starting to hurt, not sure what this moment meant, and continued to try and bring the metal disk upward. 

Sfx: Crack

Huh? What was that noise? Cheers and voices started spilling into his ears like a sudden pop of a balloon as he had fully regained consciousness, along with the consciousness of his senses. Something wasn’t right. Something was hurting. He looked down to see both of his arms twisted in a weird way. Nathan slowly realized what this meant; he had failed to lift the metal disk he so longed to do since a child. (Oh, and that he broke his arms, but to him that was irrelevant) 

Everything after that was a blur. It felt like it went in slow motion, but also as fast as a blink. Nathan had lost all strength and injured his two arms badly. The aftermath of this was that he had fallen to the ground, crying and sobbing at his defeat; and as sobs grew louder and tears streamed down his eyes, the audience knew that the moment that was hyped up was all lies. The crowd disappeared as fast as Nathan’s flowing tears of anger and disappointment did, because he knew crying wouldn’t get him anywhere. As he lay on the sand of the playground, he closed his eyes and became aware of the surroundings around him. Summer afternoon, cool breeze, the same crickets croaking, and the sun radiating on his sweating body. The feeling was nice. Nathan had had so much confidence taken away from him all he could do was lie down and think. Though this was true, his determination had not completely faded. In his mind, there were many alternatives to still achieving his dream of the metal disk. So as the thoughts continued to pop into his mind, his confidence also regained slowly but surely. 

Nathan knew this wasn’t the end, because little Nathan had dreams that were passed on to 16 year old Nathan, and if those dreams were not reached, they would either be lost and forgotten, or a burden on adult Nathan. 

As Nathan got up, his attitude charged up fully to continue training for the metal disk. So he walked away and returned home…. Not before he passed by a tiny 7 year old boy. The moment Nathan passed by him, a strange shock like electricity went through his body, so he looked back on the little boy running to the playground. He was heading for the metal disk. Nathan watched as the little boy was looking at the metal disk, not knowing what events had taken place beforehand; but without hesitation, he tried pulling on it and… 

He took it out. 
The random 7 year old boy had officially claimed the metal disk. 

End

By: Misia Lui