Unit 1:  Understanding Business
BBI2O

What is a Business?





We can more accurately identify or classify a business based on the its various characteristics, as set out in the categories below:

Profit or Non-Profit?

Most businesses are run for a profit.   Provide three examples of for-profit businesses that operate in our community:



Others, such as charities, operate solely to help people in a community.  These are most often called non-profit or not-for-profit organizations.  Provide three examples of this type of business that operate in our community:



Non-profit  


Not-for-profit 



Not all co-operatives are not-for-profits, however.  Some do make money and distribute the profit to all members.  A co-operative 




For-Profit 


Profit is what is left over after all expenses and costs have been paid.


Expenses  



Costs  






Solvency   




Large or Small Business





Types/Forms of Business Ownership

 Businesses owned by a single individual are termed sole proprietorships. A partnership can include two or more owners. Co-operatives, as we mentioned already, are owned by workers, often in not-for-profit arrangements. A corporation is a legal entity recognized as such under the law,acting on behalf of a group of people or company. Limited partnershi[s include two classes of partners - general partners (who manage and run the company. Limited partnerships include two classes of partners - general partners (who manage and run the company) and limited partners, who share less liability and have no management control in a company.

Sole proprietorship - 1 owner (100% profit)
Partnership - > 2 owners (split profit) 
Corporation - “company” -> legal rights of a human








Goods or Services

Businesses which sells tangible goods, like Home Hardware, differ greatly than a company which sells only services, like a barbershop.  Many companies today, like Home Depot and Best Buy, offer both goods and services.  List one service offered by each Home Depot and Best Buy.

Good -> item, some thing
Service -> something you do


Channels of Distribution

Traditional stores, like Walmart, are termed “bricks and mortar” businesses. However, many are gravitating towards e-commerce outfits, like Ebay and Amazon.com. These businesses are less visible with physical structures and store fronts, but have a huge presence in cyberspace.

List three companies that combine both a brick and mortar store, with e-commerce services.

 




Role in the Community

Businesses can be classified by the roles that they play in communities. For example real estate companies offer professional services that are particularly knowledgeable and targeted to specific neighborhoods and areas. Charities raise funds that meet particular needs in a community. 

Jobs

Some communities, particularly single industry towns like red rock, Ontario, are focused and built around a single or a few, companies. These industries or companies provide both direct and indirect jobs in the community. Tertiary jobs are those that are specific to the service sector, like travel agencies, restaurants, and physiotherapist offices. 






