Secretary's Report 

The regular meeting of the People Christian Academy student council was called to order by president Ethan Shewan at 7:37 on November 11, 2022. 
Ethan gave the Student Council report. He talked about:

Unfinished business included the discussion of: 

Tuck Shop: 
Due to lack of customers, we’re deciding on
Will only use a cart, no table 
Will still have two days of Tuck shop, if there is more business, will put out the table
A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Hanna Viljoen and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 

Nintendo Switch Event: 
Do we have enough people bringing switches? 
Will only have one room for the event, if there are more people, will open a second room 
Min. will being two switches 
Will no longer ask board game club for games, SS members will bring games (if they have them)
Will set up a schedule 

SS Event Board Calendar 
Marley will design the event calendar 
Will ask Mr. Mcdonald for all SS birthdays 

Winter Formal: 
Soft budget: $5500
Ticket prices: $55 (soft budget, not set on it yet) 
Will get round tables 
SC will create a sitting plan for each table, will get adjusted by Mr. Radder and Mr. Shin 
Guest estimation: around 150
Catering
Mamma Rita’s Cuisine 
Ethan will email cattery company and be specific about how they will set up and deliver food
Dessert plans
Will probably go to Costco and buy a cake 
Photo booth
Decided on $1000 for 3 hours
Max budget per plate is $35, if possible $30 would be best 
Will get all the prices for food from catering and Ethan and Marley will call them after school 
Gabriel will design a poster for winter formal 

Clothing Drive: 
Proposed date: in three weeks, December 9th on a Friday 
A motion was made by Hanna Viljoen to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Marley Shum and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 
By tomorrow morning, 
Hanna will create a sign up sheet for event 
Will create an announcement for SS 

 The meeting was adjourned at 8:18 am.








