Secretary's Report 

The regular meeting of the People Christian Academy student council was called to order by president Ethan Shewan at 3:33 pm on November 7, 2022. 
Ethan gave the Student Council report. He talked about:
 
Community service community- new members: Lydia Christopher and Andrex
Prom Committee- First meeting will be this friday during lunch 
Pizza business is pretty much done from concern

Unfinished business included the discussion of:  

Tuck Shop
Middle school has decided to not let the students buy from the Tuck Shop
Peace tea didn’t have much good feedback, settle on just providing Coke and Nestea 
A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Marley Shum and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 
Lollipops are really popular, will get more 

Nintendo Switch Event 
Date: Next week November 18th SSACT block 
Decided not to make a sign up form for the new students, will just announce it to them and let them come and bring others if they want to. 
Might work with board game club in order to bring more games for the event 
All SC members will supervise, as well as Mr. Radder and Mr.Shin 

SS Event Board Calendar
Mr. Radder will receive the white board today
Gabriel will design the whiteboard and write all the schedules for the upcoming months 
Ask Mr. Mcdonald for a list of birthdays for the calendar 
Will announce that there will be an announcement board to inform students to check around the area 

Winter formal 
Asked Mrs. Ho, original scheduling clashes with the Christmas Concert 
Will move date to later, around December 20-22th 
Marley has assigned all sc with roles for the winter formal 
Full info on SC 2022-2023: Winter Semi Formal
Theme: Winter Wonderland (White, Dark Green, Blue, Silver) 
SC members as well as teachers might be able to help serve food, as well as catering team 
Possible photo booth like the booth at the 50th anniversary 

White elephant (will we discuss this more next time) 

Sandwich run 
No longer possible to run, we aren’t allowed to handle food 
Might switch to a clothing run 
Mr. Shin will email teachers who are interested to go, then forms will be sent out for students to sign up to 

 The meeting was adjourned at 8:17 am.










