Secretary's Report 

The regular meeting of the People Christian Academy student council was called to order by president Ethan Shewan at 7:39 on November 21, 2022. 
Ethan gave the Student Council report. He talked about:

Total balance: $1873.60

Old Business:
Pizza and Tuck Shop Review 
Marley got pizza tongs 
After the nintendo switch event, we need to restock on pop and chips (especially ice tea) 
Each sc member can take one free thing a week, otherwise we have to pay 

A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Hanna Viljoen and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 

Nintendo Switch Event: 
All business done, event successful 

Public SS Event Calendar
I need to check before school starts to see what needs to be added (birthdays, events, etc..)
Will probably ask to move the calendar closer to the SS section of the school in for no writing to be messed up by middle school students 

A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Hanna Viljoen and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 

Winter Formal Planning 

Gabriel made a bunch of posters and ticket designs, will print out and laminate 
Will create a google form and spreadsheet in order to keep track of menu choices and record of ticket purchases, as well as additional information; Hanna will make the spreadsheet and will find a way to make a QR code (might ask Anson Mou) 
Form of payment for the tickets will probably be just cash 
What did the prom committee talk about in regard to the winter semi formal?
Mama Rita’s Catering new sampling date: possibly tomorrow if short notice is alright, Ethan will email her if it’s possible.
Mrs. Walker would like to help, let's contact her.
Hanna created a signup form which will be released to SS this Thursday
Still finding round tables 


Clothing Drive (Hanna)
Do we have a date?
Will probably be distributing winter items like mittens, hats, scarfs, etc 
A form will be created for people who would like to sign up to help out in the clothing drive 

An Appreciation Card for Mr. A 
Marley will create a big card for all of SS to sign as gratitude to thank Mr. A for all the hard work he has done for this school 
Might go around to all the classes during homeroom this week so they can all sign it  
Ethan and Marley will probably bring the card to each homeroom 

We really need another meeting due to the fact that there is a lot to talk about and plan.

The meeting was adjourned at 8:20 am.


