Secretary's Report 

The regular meeting of the People Christian Academy student council was called to order by president Ethan Shewan at 3:40 pm on November 2, 2022. This meeting is a continuation from the meeting held on Monday morning, October 31, 2022. 

Pizza make up days: 
Give all students who missed pizza on pizza Wednesday their pizza
Pizza will be cold, but preserved from freezer hours before distribution
A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Gabriel Xu and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 

Tuck Shop: 
For tomorrow’s tuck shop, no to sour keys (just for this Thursday), yes to assorted pop, lollipops, chips, maybe to instant noodles
Mr. Radder will buy the sour keys, which will arrive this Monday (and will be in the Tuck shop on Tuesday).
Sour Keys: $0.75
A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Enoch Chu and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 

Nintendo Switch Event (For new students)
Switch tournament, including Mario Kart, Super Smash Bros
Initially planned next week, but event should be held in two weeks 
Will be held on Nov.18th SSACT block (as of now) 
Jesse will make the signup sheet 
Signup sheet will be open to new students first, if there are any spaces left the rest of the SS will have the privilege of filling the extra spaces. 
New students (gr 9s) will be able to bring a plus one of their choice which is NOT a new student. 
This event will be finalized in the next meeting (Monday Morning Nov.7) 

Public SS Event Calendar 
Will release a whiteboard calendar for SS to see upcoming events that will be held, as well as birthdays and special holidays
Gabriel will create the whiteboard
Will hang calendar across the hallways 
A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Gabriel Xu and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 





Sandwich runs
For full info refer to Sandwich Runs Planning
Note: This is an exclusive SC event 
Will email teachers and make a signup sheet to see who will be interested to supervise on the day of. 
Later on I will have approval from the school. 
Date will be TBD, possibly two dates; one before Christmas and one after.
A motion was made by Hanna Viljoen to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Ethan Shewan and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 

Community Service Committee
Hanna will try to hunt down more possible candidates for the committee for Monday 

Prom Committee
Wendy, Marissa, Judy, Reis, as well as Marley will be the Prom Committee this year. 
Will have a meeting later on to discuss the plans.

Road Trip Day
Possible locations
	⁃	Ripley's aquarium/ Rec room
	⁃	Dave And Busters/ Sky Zone
	⁃	Christmas Market/ St. Lawrence Market
Idea’s motion did not carry. 

Ski Trips
Horseshoe Valley (??)
Ethan will email Mrs. Lee (VP) and ask if there are any forms that would be useful for ski trips 
Will be held early February (as of now) 

Winter formal/ Semi-formal 
For full info refer to SC 2022-2023: Winter Formal
Theme: Winter wonderland
Misia will ask Billy Ho for permission to use the gym around 5pm after school until 10pm.
Regarding publicity: Gabriel will create posters for semi formal

White Elephant for Winter formal 
A requirement for the entry fee for winter formal will be to bring a present ranging $10-15. 
At the end of the night, the last event will be spinning a wheel and every SS student attending will receive a mystery gift
The later you are to receive your gift, you can steal other people’s gift if you desire.
The meeting was adjourned at 5:10PM.
 






 





