Secretary’s Report 

The regular meeting of the People Christian Academy student council was called to order by president Ethan Shewan at 7:35 am on October 31, 2022. Ethan gave the Student Council report. He talked about:

Planning for ski trips 
New event for upcoming friday SSACT block 

Unfinished business included the discussion of how to receive and distribute pizza to everyone.
Probably going to make a master grade list for students to check off names when receiving pizza.
For selling pizza on the day of: 
$4 for two pizza slices
Will have two extra pizzas for the SS staff 
Will buy tongs to distribute pizza
Grade 9’s will not be here on Wednesday, so Enoch Chiu will count how many pizzas will be dismissed for that day. 
People who missed out on pizza day and paid for pizza will be able to receive their pizza on another day.
Will be able to receive up to how many much pizzas they missed on the 1 make up day 

A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Marley Shum and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 

Tuck Shop 
Most popular item: lollipops 
Least popular item: mini chocolate bars 
Would be better to mix in the chocolate bars with the other assorted candies and sell them all together for cheaper 
A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Enoch Chiu and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 
New item (?): Sour keys
50 cents for price 
A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Marley Shum/ Jesse Garas and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 
Drinks 
Assorted pop 
A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Hanna Viljoen and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 


Nintendo Switch Event
1-4 rooms of games 
Super Smash Bros
Mario Kart 
Etc. 
Dates: November 11 (?????)
Jesse Garas will research more into dates and times available for that. 

Winter formal
All SC members will stay after school and stay AT school 4-10PM (To set up and clean up gym) 
Actual event will last 6-9PM 
Winter formal will probably be held December 15th. 
Theme will be discussed next meeting 

The meeting was adjourned at 8:18 am. 
(We definitely need at least two meetings per week one hour is not enough)