Secretary's Report 

The regular meeting of the People Christian Academy student council was called to order by president Ethan Shewan at 7:40 am on October 17, 2022. No previous minutes from the previous meeting. Ethan gave the Student Council report. He talked about:

Non-uniform day costume contest 
Move homeroom to Friday? 
Prize: $10 amazon gift card 
Regarding fee to enter: every student in the SS will have an option to dress up with a costume for free, otherwise $2 for all non-uniform outfits, if they decide to just wear uniform, that’s alright too. 
Unfinished business included the discussion of a non-uniform day costume context change in fee. A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Jesse Garas and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 

Tuck shop
Hanna will go to Costco after school today to buy food for the Tuck shop (she will take pictures for us to choose from).
The tuck shop will start this Thursday in order for us to hype up the shop before then. 
Unfinished business included the discussion of changing the Tuck shop launch to Thursday. A motion was made by Ethan Shewan to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Misia Lui and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 

House team sorting 
Mrs. Byon is still sorting out all students into their houses, still TBD.

Collecting pizza forms 
All forms are due this Friday.

Finished business 
We have concluded the pizza forms for a pizza wednesday from dominos, forms are handed out. Pizza per slice $3.75.

 New business discussed included 

Possible graphic designer for scheduling
An organizer for all SC members to add any events to keep everyone up to date. 
Motion did not carry. 




Switch Tournament 
An event for new students (carried out by Jesse Garas) 
Bonding event for the new students to have fun and get to know each other (which include all grade nines)
Entrance fee for old students will be $2, otherwise will be free 
Might start in two weeks, possibly after school around 3:25 to ….. (?)
Tournament maybe during lunch 
Will start advertising this week 

A motion was made by Jesse Garas to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Ethan Shewan and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 

For community service committee (run by Hanna Viljoen) 
Still looking for members (2 so far)
She has asked past candidates for the community service position 
Will have other SC members ask around if people want to join

For Prom (ran by Marley) 
Still need more members
Marley has asked past VP candidates as well as Secretary, will get back to this.

Winter formal 
If we want a winter formal, we need to start planning now, considering we only have a month and a month. 
Possible date: the week before the last week of Christmas break (which is December 22) 

The meeting was adjourned at 8:17am. 

