Secretary's Report 

The regular meeting of the People Christian Academy student council was called to order by president Ethan Shewan at 7:35am on October 17, 2022. No previous minutes from the previous meeting. Ethan gave the Student Council report. He talked about:
Shadowing Mrs. Aspinall with Mr. Radder regarding pizza
Any upcoming day trips

Unfinished business included the discussion of pizza days. 
Enoch emailed pizza nova on friday, still haven’t got a reply. 
Pizza nova or pizza pizza??
Maybe pizza Wednesdays instead of Thursdays? 

New business discussed included 

Non-uniform day: 
Next Thursday, non uniform costume day. Voting process for the event will be discussed next time. (Still TBD, needs to be confirmed by Mrs. Lee)
Possible prize: $10 gift card? (Suggested by Ethan) 
Marley will post google forms for voting 
All voting will take place lunch during that Friday
All homerooms will vote for the best costume within their own homeroom

The idea of a non uniform day next week was brought up by Ethan Shewan. A motion was made by Marley Shum to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Hanna Viljoen and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 

Pizza issue

The idea of voting on Pizza Pizza instead of Pizza Nova for efficiency was brought up by Ethan Shewan. A motion was made by Marley Shum to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Ethan Shewan and a hand vote was taken. The motion did not carry. Instead, we will move the voting to 4pm today (to wait a little longer), and decide then. 

Tuck Shop

Two alternatives: 
Use a shopping cart full of snacks to push around each classroom and ask if they want to purchase anything
Set up a schedule to push around cart per person
Set up a table in the senior school hallway for Tuck shop

The idea of using a shopping cart for Tuck shop was brought up by Ethan Shewan. A motion was made by Marley Shum to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Gabriel Xu and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 

The idea of creating a schedule for a shopping cart Tuck shop was brought up by Hanna Viljoen. A motion was made by Marley Shum to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Enoch Chiu and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry.

Minute to win it

Possibly this week, not sure due to the fact Mrs. Byon has not sorted out all the houses yet.
All teams will be within homerooms.

The idea of homerooms for teams was brought up by Ethan Shewan. A motion was made by Gabriel Xu to accept this idea. Motion was seconded by Marley Shum and a hand vote was taken. The motion did carry. 

Main Verse Chosen for the Year

The idea of 1 Corinthians 12:12 for verse of the year was brought up by Ethan Shewan. Motion was unanimous, motion did carry. 

The main program was teamwork and communication by Ethan Shewan.

The meeting was adjourned at 8:12 am. 

