Chapter 1: It’s Your Style

My Brand 

Brainstorming - 
M: Meaningful, materialistic, melancholy, melodramatic, mindful, meticulous, modest, merry 
I : Illogical, idealistic, integral, ironic, inspiring, indecisive
S: Sappy, sarcastic, sleepy, selfless, sophisticated, steadfast 
I: Illogical, idealistic, integral, ironic, inspiring, indecisive (same thing as first “I”) 
A: Attentive, accessible, ambivalent, administrative, knowledgeable 



Interests in School & Interest Outside of School 




























9-smarts 


After laying out all my relations between each intelligence, I have concluded that I am people smart, logic smart, deep smart, and self smart. 





Chapter 2: The Manager of You Is You 

What Do I Do All Day? 

Brainstorm list: Sleeping, eating, going to class, lunch, reading, calling friends, playing games, homework, dinner


The activities that soak up most of my time are my sleeping, school, and entertainment like calling friends, reading, and games. Meanwhile I spend the least amount of time on playing piano; I usually play longer but I had a longer dinner than usual today. I had planned to play with my dog and step outside for some fresh air, but I didn’t have enough time to (that or I forgot). Because of this, I'd like to reduce the amount of time I call my friends because then I might’ve had time to do things that I planned to do. 









Chapter 3: Out There 

Enablers & Obstacles 


	If I was able to get rid of all the obstacles in my life, I would definitely be able to achieve all my goals much faster. So far, an example of one of the biggest obstacles in school would be technology. It is the downfall and rise of achieving goals. On one hand, it is very efficient and school requires it more and more, but on the other hand, it is our greatest distraction. It not only has resources we need to learn, but entertainment media as well which leads us to procrastinating. If I need to overcome this obstacle, the assistance I would need would be a strong state of mind. I need to tell myself that I shouldn’t be looking at things that will make me procrastinate. From others, I could ask my parents to take away my phone and monitor me every once in a while to keep me focused. 


















Chapter 8: Getting the Information You Need 

Area of Study

My smarts- self smart, logic smart, people smart, deep smart
Learning style- Auditory learner 
My interests- Listening to true crime podcasts, reading manga, playing rhythm games, sleeping
Possible jobs- Lawyer, psychologist/therapist, english teacher 































Courses for Next Year 

























Future Possible Careers and Skills 

Career Explorer Results

Top Jobs: 
Forensic Psychologist           -    Psychiatrist             -    Lawyer 
Counselor                              -    Judge                      -    Paralegal 
Marriage therapist                 -    Psychologist           -  Judicial Law Clerk 

Top Degrees: 
Psychotherapy                      -     Law                        -     Psychoanalysis 
Mental Health counseling    -     Law enforcement   -     Forensic psychology 

Potential Skills: 
Patience                     -    People skills        -    Observation        
Critical thinking        -    Organization        -    Perspective thinking         
Emotional stability    -    Listening             -    Honest and responsible         
Time management     -    Fast research       -    Strong reasoning/ excuses    
Communication        -     Open-minded      -    Problem solving      




















Community Services 

Mental - French horn private lessons (Royal Conservatory of Music)
Physical - Badminton (KC Badminton) 
Emotional - My cousin who’s a psychiatrist who can give me advice 
Social - Debate club, discusses different topics with fore and against opinions to see which can conduct information that is more powerful that the other.  (PCA)

Double up: Mental - French Horn Private Lessons 

Identify the organization for private lessons: Royal Conservatory of Music (RCM) 
Email RCM or go to RCM in person to go find a reception. 
Find help by asking the person at the reception or person emailing you back how to get private lessons.
Person tells me that they can help me find a professional tutor associated with RCM to teach me. Depending on the person the price differs. For mine it was $100 per lesson. Location can either be at RCM or online on Zoom. 
Writing down all information for later reference and applying for lessons by giving personal information to the receptionist. 
Get a tutor and begin lessons.


This mental has contributed to school because whenever a band or music question shows up I can be able to play my french horn with ease.














Chapter 9: Be Your Own Advocate 

Support Group

I have a support group, and it’s my parents and a certain close friend. The advice they gave me was very insightful and I liked their advice because it was useful, it opened up new thinking perspectives. 

These are the traits I think would be most important for a support group to demonstrate. 

1. Leadership 
2. Encouragement 
3. Optimism
4. Knowledgeable 
5. Flexible 

With those traits, this is the order of importance it should go by. 

1. Flexible 
2. Encouragement 
3. Leadership 
4. Knowledgeable 
5. Optimism 

We all have many issues that need to be helped on, with each person they can provide a certain aspect. As shown below in this chart: 
 


