SEMIIIII 

Theme
Sugar and Spice: A Candy Forest

Nathan
Ethan 
Keira

Before Video: 
Thank you all for supporting our bake sale which was made by the Formal committee and SC. This year, our semi-formal will be on December 19, the last day of school before winter break. It will be from 6:00 PM to 9:30 PM. For semi, you are not allowed to invite guests outside of PCA. For those who know how past semi-formals go, you all know the format. This year, there is something different…good luck!!

After Video: 
As you saw from the video, this story is surrounding our little gingerbread man Ginbre, a very wisely chosen name made by our wonderful formal committee. The title of our semi might be confusing, but don’t worry, you’ll just have to trust us with it. This year’s semi, you will be stepping into a very colourful, warm, and bright setting. To match that you will be coming into semi with pastel colours as the dress code.. It’s important to know that it’s a semi-formal so don’t come in with a whole gown and tuxedo. But with that make sure that the clothing you wear meets the PCA standard of moderation, modesty, and neatness in dress. We remind you of our school’s expectations, if you are uncertain about what to wear, ask a teacher, student council member, or the student handbook. 

This year for tickets, it is much cheaper than previous years, but only for a specific amount of time. Ticket sales will start on November 20. You will be able to buy tickets for only $35. From this day on, we sell on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. However, after the 20th, the tickets will be $40, so make sure you buy the cheap early bird tickets as it will be a one time deal. The $40 tickets will be last sold on Friday Nov 29. After the 29th, the ticket sales will continue to go on sale until Dec 4th but at a price of $50. After that, no tickets will be available. However we have a special offer, PLEASE LISTEN TO THIS. Tomorrow, Thursday, and the coming Monday, when we sell tuck, you will have a chance to enter a raffle draw to get FREE TICKETS to semi ONLY if you purchase something over $5 from tuck. We will be drawing two ticket winners on November 20th before the tickets start selling. All ticket sales will be on the stage except for the 29th. Reminders will be posted so make sure to check it. Very important, for this year's meals, you will have the opportunity to choose what you will get (more info on menu options will be on the student council instagram). On the tickets, there will be a QR code that will directly take you to a Google form that has all the choices as well as a section to put any dietary restrictions that you have. If you do get tickets, please make sure to complete the google form before the last ticket sale date. People who get tickets on the last day, you must complete the form by the end of the day otherwise you will not receive any food. 

