Spain Missions Application Form


1. Describe why you are applying for this particular project?

I am applying for this particular project because this past year I have gone through a lot in my relationship with God. I had the opportunity to apply for the past two years, but I had prayed on it a lot and realized that I was not in the right condition to be serving and ministering towards others just yet. I’ve seen God change the people around me and The reasons for why they applied to missions as well, and I realized that I still needed to go through more ups and downs and realizations, as well as undering the true meaning of what it means to serve God on my own before applying it to others through the missions trip.

2. From what you understand, what is the purpose for missions projects?

In my understanding, the purpose of serving through missions projects is to have the privilege of connecting with those who are not as privileged as us, as well as helping them seek the word of God. through travelling to a different place in the world, especially going to a place that has worse living conditions than we normally do, it really shapes our worldly perspective on how others live compared to how we live, and even though we might have more material things, the one thing that will always stick to anyone who is willing is the Word of the Lord. In regards to a purpose for the actual missions team members, this trip should be meant to grow our relationship with God as well as find ministry and fellowship through one another, especially in a very different setting than school. 

3. Explain, as clearly as possible, what the gospel is. How would you share it with someone unfamiliar with it?

In textbook terms, the gospel is the word of Jesus Christ and God and the Holy Spirit what he has done and how that changes the entire world. If I were to tell this to a person who is not familiar with the gospel, the gospel is meant to recognize our simple nature, and the separation that God has with every single one of us. It also shows the miracles and his gigantic forgiveness on how Jesus Christ rose from the dead and died for our sins, and because of that, we are able to find a new life through faith in Christ as long as we are willing to acknowledge that he is our saviour and we know that he loves us unconditionally. All of this is true, yet the gospel also gives us an opportunity to share this. We can express how exactly our lives have changed, and to shape our perspectives on how to live in a Christ like figure in other peoples lives.

4. What strengths and skills would you bring to a team if you were selected?

If I were to be selected for the missions team, some strengths and skills that I would be able to bring would be that I am very open to meeting new people as well as empathizing and listening to their struggles. I am also relatively charismatic as well as positive even in situations which are not the greatest. I have experience in leading big groups as well as being able to connect with others on a spiritual level, which would be very helpful when serving in Spain.

5. What areas in your life do you hope to grow in as a result of being on this team?

If I am on the missions team, this would be God telling me that he is putting me on this path for a reason and that it will definitely help me grow a lot more. I have gone through a lot of situations in the near past. Through this, it has shaped me into the way I think now as well as my perspective and relationship with Christ. I want to be able to strengthen my foundation with him even more, know how to bring everything up to him and allow him to work through me and my daily life, as well as truly understand what it means to say that “ all I have is Christ”. 

6. Why should you be selected to participate in this project?

I am at the point in my life where I believe I am ready to take on such a big responsibility like serving on a missions team. Though this is the case, I would only want to be accepted if God believes that it is the right time for me. I would love to be selected to participate in this project, and I have many creative and insightful contributions I know will be able to help out the missions team, but I know that whatever happens, I will be content with what lie ahead of me with my journey in through God. 

7. If we were to interview your friends and classmates, how do you think they would describe the integrity and depth of your
relationship with Jesus? Explain.

If you were to ask my friends and classmates on how my integrity in-depth is in my relationship with Jesus, I think a lot of them would say that I have changed a lot in the past year. I have spoken to them about the conflicts going on in my life and how I expressed that I wanted God to help take control of all of them, but when I finally let myself put all my trust in Jesus, they told me that they could see a noticeable change in attitude, as well as my perspective on what it really means to follow Him. i’m sure that they understand. I still have a lot to learn and grow, but I am truly grateful for having people such as them being able to help me shape my mindset.

8. What effort have you made to be involved in sharing the gospel, serving the poor and blessing others sacrificially in the
past year?

I am an active student leader in my church, which means that through Bible studies and fun activities I can find opportunities to spread the gospel to those who would want to learn more about it, or those who have not even met him before. I also attend the service runs led by PCA SC’s and have interacted with countless homeless people about what I can help them and how I can pray fort them, as well as how their aspect on God is. Being able to talk to a variety of people has really shaped me to believe that God can provide a miracle for anyone. Aside from that, I attended a summer mission kids camp led by Mrs. Byon and Mrs. Tam; this consisted of creating storyboards and offering free sessions to kids around a neighbourhood to have some fun play some games and sprea the word of God. Finally, I was also recently excepted to be a teens conference captain, and while training has only started, I believe serving with other people who have a mindset that is similar to me and is also going on a close journey with God is extremely important. 

9. How do you handle conflict and disagreements within the context of a team? Give an example of how you’ve worked
through a conflict before.

Sometimes there are other people on your team that have very different views on how to handle a situation. An example of this would be during church, all the student leaders had an event that needed to be planned out by all of us and executed by the end of the night. We were running short on time meaning that we would have to start rushing a lot of the smaller details of this event, which caused a lot of us to start talking over each other. While this happened, I could sense the atmosphere of some people feeling very annoyed and unwilling to proceed any further with planning just because of the constant suggestions overlapping against each other. It is very easy to feel annoyed with other members of a team, especially when short on time, but luckily one of us was able to calm everyone down and remind us that the true meaning of creating this event is to show unity through the student leaders, as well as our willingness to share our creativity as well as how the Holy Spirit is working through all of us as a group united.

10. How would you explain the purpose of this mission trip to a friend who doesn’t understand why you’re going?

If I were to explain the purpose of a missions trip to a friend who doesn’t understand why I’m going, I would say it’s to have a new experience and perspective of a completely different place where we are from, and how we can use God’s gifts to work through us and reach the people who live there.

11. If this team were not traveling to Spain but instead going to downtown Toronto, would you still be as interested in
participating? Why or why not?

I would still be more than willing to participate. Deciding to go on this mission trip was something I was set on doing before knowing it was going to be Spain this year, and my main goal of being a part of this team would be to meet new people and spread the word of God to those who are looking to hear it, or to those who have a future with the Lord. Of course, Spain is such an amazing opportunity and amazing area to try to serve, but ultimately location never matters when it comes to evangelizing to others.

12. Have you been on a mission trip before? If so, briefly describe where you went and what you did. Name one way your life
is different as a result of the experience. Why should you be selected to go on another mission trip?

I have not been on a missions Trip before.

13. Participating in this kind of a team requires a team of prayer support and financial support to raise roughly $3050. Do you
have any concerns about raising the financial and prayer support to participate on this team? Please explain.

I do not have any concerns about raising the financial prayer support.

14. What other extra-curricular activities are you involved in that may interfere with your commitment to the missions team?
Please describe the time commitments involved in these activities.

As of right now, I am part of the student council in PCA, I will most likely be joining the drama production team as well, and I will have teens conference captain training during the weekends.

15. Do you have any health (physical, emotional or psychological) concerns that the team leaders should be aware of?

Sometimes, if I do not wash my face for one or two days, or put something foreign on my face, it can swell up due to allergic reactions, and sometimes it can be very severe. Usually a medical cream is enough to calm my skin down, but I would probably need to wash my face every one to two days.

16. We will be meeting for training on many Fridays at lunch or during the SSACT block until our departure in April and
potentially all day on Friday, November 22. Do you foresee any conflicts with these sessions?

During November 22, my church will be going away on a retreat and departing around 6 PM. Regarding SSACT blocks, sometimes the student council might hold some events for other students, but I am not always required to be there as long as I am not the one in charge. Other than that, there are no conflicts in the scheduling. 

17. Do you have a home church which you attend regularly? If so, what is it?

Rhccc, Richmond Hill Christian community Church.

18. A travel medical clinic may recommend some vaccines before traveling to Spain. Do you have a copy of your vaccination
records and are all of your other standard vaccinations up to date?
