
Act 1, Scene 1-2
What has recently happened to Olivia? How long will she mourn? 
Her brother and father died within the same year. She is pledged to be mourning for 7 years.
What country are we in? 
Illyria
“If music be the food of love, play on...”
This first line of the play is a very famous one. What does the line make you think of? How might it be an introduction to the rest of the play? Why is there a comparison between music and love
Music is the gateway to love. This line introduces the rest of the play as it shows what 
the main character is concerned with … the idea of love. Music brings up emotion and emotion is strongly connected with LOVE. 
In this opening scene, we are introduced to Duke Orsino and his love for Olivia.    How would you describe each of these characters? In what ways are their situations similar? How is their behaviour alike? Would you consider it “healthy” behaviour?
Both love with an over-dramatic flair, they are very passionate about how they feel and are devoted to that feeling for however long they decide. Probably not a healthy, balanced view of love.
Describe Viola’s personality and character based on what you know so far.
Smart, hopeful, grateful and resourceful
Why would Viola disguise herself as a young man while she is in Illyria? What uncertainties would she face as a woman in a strange land?
She would not know who to trust nor would she be able to work. She says she will disguise herself until she can prove her identity (her place/stature in the world)


Act 1, Scene 3
Do you like Sir Toby, Sir Andrew and Maria? Do you approve of their behaviour? What aspects of their behaviour might be offensive to some people?
They drink and tell dirty (sexual) jokes
What about this scene makes it an example of low comedy? 
Jokes, drinking, friends

Act 1, Scene 4
Who is Cesario? What mission is the Duke sending Cesario on? 
He is Viola, disguised. He is giving Orsino’s message of love to Olivia; however, Viola has secretly fallen in love with Orsino!
Dramatic irony occurs when the audience knows something of which some or all of the characters onstage are unaware. In this scene, the dramatic irony is found in Orsino’s praise of Cesario’s “feminine” qualities. Find two examples of dramatic irony in this scene.
Her lips are smooth, her voice is high and she is womanish.

Act 1, Scene 5
What is one of the jokes/jests the fool tries on Olivia to lighten her spirits? How does he prove her the fool with this jest?
He calls her a fool as she is mourning the death of her brother. If her brother is in heaven, she should celebrate and not mourn.
How might Orsino attract Olivia’s attention if it were today? Give three different examples.
Dedicate a song to her, write her a letter, post a note on her locker, invite her to a movie
What is Malvolio like?  Describe him. 
Mean and says his mind. He chides Olivia a bit for liking the Fool and outwardly does not like the Fool’s jokes
How is Viola "Not what she seems"? What is the problem that Viola is in?
She is dressed as a man. Her problem is that she likes the Duke but delivers his messages of love.
What is Olivia's developing problem?
She loves Cesario/Viola, who is the Duke’s messenger and is actually a woman, also she has pledged to be in mourning for 7 years.
How many compliments can you find?  List two puns that Viola says to Olivia.  
“Chapter of his bosom” and “heresy”. She is also described in a metaphor — curtain and picture are veil and face.


Act 2, Scene 1
What has happened to Sebastian?  Who has helped him? 
He was saved by Antonio, another sea captain. He wishes he were dead and is on his way to Orsino's court.
Time is somewhat relative in this play. When should the scene with Sebastian occur? Why doesn't it (a very practical reason). 
Viola is rescued in Act 1, scene ii, BUT, to trick the audience Viola just exits in 1.5 and Sebastian enters at 2.1. We are also taken aback by Viola’s disguise.

Act 2, Scene 2
A soliloquy is a speech in which a character thinks aloud while alone on stage. It is intended to reveal the thoughts and feelings of the speaker to the audience. Reread Viola’s soliloquy in this scene (lines 16-40).  Why does Olivia give Viola her ring? 
Olivia wants Viola to come back and give her the ring. She wants to see Viola again.
Respond to the following statement: “The frailty of women will forever prevent them from begin the equals of men.”  What do you think? 
Women were not thought as equals in the 1600’s.
Record your impressions of Malvolio. What  do you learn about his character in this scene?  
He is stubborn, serious, obedient and prideful.

Act 2, Scene 3
Reread the confrontation between Malvolio and the partiers (lines 82 – 117). With whom do you sympathize the most and why? 
I sympathize with Malvolio as he is trying to do his job, although he is prideful, and Toby is constantly causing trouble.
What is it about Malvolio that makes Maria and her friends want to plot revenge against him?
Malvolio says he will tell Olivia about Maria if she does not discourage Sir Toby’s behaviour.
What is your impression of Maria’s plan? Will it be good fun or cruel embarrassment? Would you go along with it? Why or why not?
I think it will be good fun because as Malvolio is egotistical and serious, he would not let his true emotions show and he would not gush over love letters in front of others. Therefore, if he were embarrassed, it would be in secret where his embarrassment would not be seen by others.

Act 2, Scene 4
What does the Duke send Viola to do? How does Viola answer him?
Tell of his love to Olivia. Viola thinks his messages are useless because Olivia does not love him but the Duke will not listen.
How does Orsino define male love? How did Olivia describe male love two scenes ago? 
As hungry as the sea and very passionate, he also says man’s love is changeable BUT also constantly fixated on one woman. Orsino’s love is contradictory.
What sad thought does Viola tell Orsino? What does she say that almost reveals her secret?  What literary device does this use? 
Viola tells the story of her sister who dies from love (grief in love). This is dramatic irony as she talks about herself — “I am the sisters of my father’s house and all the brothers too” 
(aka she is the only child, but she also reveals her true identity)
Why do you think Viola has fallen in love with Orsino? What exactly are the features of his character or personality that Viola admires? What is her definition of love?  Is it the same as Orsino’s definition?  
He has revealed his true self to her — loyal and passionate. Her definition of love is to wait and hope that it will arrive (unrequited love,) His definition is very passionate but fickle.
Do you think that the emotion and experience of love are the same for both men and women? Do men and women define love in the same way? What attracts women to men? What attracts men to women? What is the relationship between attraction and love?
I think the experience of love may be different, because nowadays, from experience and research, most males feel like they are not worthy enough for a female’s love and have very low self-esteem. However, in my opinion, females are luckier in the love section; they just need to be pretty and most of the time if they ask someone out, there is a higher rate of acceptance than if a male asks a female out. I think different genders can be attracted to the same things: some women may like the feeling of being protected by a strong man, but males may also want to feel safe and protected by a strong woman. Love is about wanting to spend your whole life with someone and you would do anything for them; attraction is more of wanting to fulfill your own desires and it is much more shallow than love.

Act 2, Scene 5
What is Malvolio imagining himself doing? 
He is lying with Olivia and playing with jewels while also bossing around Toby and Andrew
How is the hooking of Malvolio like the catching of a fish? 
It is a metaphor: Malvolio is the fish and the trick is the bait.
Letter instructions
Smile
Be angry with servants
Be rude to Toby
Wear yellow stockings with cross garters 
How will Olivia react to these instructions? 
She will be miffed because she hates those fashion trends AND is in mourning so will not want stuff in the house.


Act 3, Scene 1
What does Viola say to compliment the fool? 
She says he is a wise fool, which takes skill, intellect and knowledge of others’ temperaments (aka “reading” someone).
What are some of the word games Viola plays with Olivia?
She says she is “not what I am” and says she will never let a woman win her heart (aka she will be her own mistress). This is dramatic irony as the audience knows she is a woman and wants to marry Orsino BUT Olivia may think she is pledging a life of celibacy

Act 3, Scene 2
How does Toby try to convince Andrew of Olivia's love for him?
He says that Olivia is ignoring him and talking to Cesario to make Andrew jealous. He says that Andrew must be courageous to win her back and that his past laziness might have ruined his chances of winning Olivia
What is Andrew going to do? 
Write a challenge to fight Cesario.
Sir Toby and Fabian’s “abuse” of Sir Andrew may be compared to the abuse of Malvolio earlier in the play. Construct a chart in which you compare the two events. The heading should include the following:
Motivations of the perpetrators
The “weakness” of the victims
The hatching of the plots
The use of letters to trick the victims

Do you sympathize with either of the victims? Is one of the practical jokes more fun/hurtful than the other? Explain your answers. 
I feel more for Malvolio as his job and sanity/reputation are on the line, however, Andrew is an idiot and should be more clever when his friends play tricks on him. There is something not genuine about Toby in this. Toby plays a bit of a role in both plans. Since Andrew is his friend, it seems more dishonest to trick him and misuse him as he does.

Act 3, Scene 3
Why is Antonio in danger in the town?
Antonio was in a sea battle with Orsino and Antonio’s side won the battle, pillaged the area and did not give back any treasures they discovered. There was little blood, but a loss of possessions.
What does Antonio give Sebastian his purse? 
So Sebastian can buy trinkets when he is sightseeing.
This short scene reinforces the positive image of Antonio as a loyal and loving friend. Why might Shakespeare want to emphasize the “goodness” of such a seemingly minor character? 
Many other characters, such as Toby and Andrew, are considered “good friends” but are not trustworthy. Shakespeare may place Antonio in the play to ensure that there is a genuine person, who contrasts with the other characters. It helps the audience see that the plot/certain characters are not “good”.
Sebastian and Viola are now in the same city, dressed exactly alike. Predict what will happen next in the play.
I think they will be mixed up and will confuse Orsino and Olivia.
Act 3, Scene 4
What is wrong with Olivia at the beginning of this scene? Why does she want Malvolio?
She is in love with Cesario, who will not return her love. She is lovesick and wants Malvolio’s sour temperament to keep her company.
What does Malvolio look like and how does he act around Sir Toby?
He is wearing yellow stockings and cross garters and will be rude to Toby and angry with the servants. He will appear haughty and prideful.
What things in Olivia's banishment does Malvolio get hope from?
He thinks she is showing care for him when she asks him to be “looked to” AND it will give him an opportunity to be rude to Toby.
How does Malvolio’s soliloquy (lines 62-81) reveal that he deceives himself as much as the others have deceived him? How, in particular, does he misinterpret Olivia’s reactions to support his belief in her affection for him?
He says “I have limed her but it is Jove’s doing, and Jove makes me thankful.” (I've got her now, but I've got God to thank for it!) He is thankful and truly believes she loves him. Also, he keeps referring to the letter and says he calls her a ‘fellow” which is a sure sign she loves him. he is making this love up as she could call anyone a fellow. it is in his head.
Again in this scene, Viola is forced to deal with society’s expectations of the male role she has assumed. As a “gentleman,” she must defend her honour according to an unwritten code of male behaviour.  What attitudes, values and actions does this code require? And what similar codes/rules are there today for males? For females? Do you think that these modern rules are fair, appropriate and useful? If not, compose a list of rules that you would support.
Viola must accept the challenge and fight if she wants to prove herself a man. A man must be outrageous and strong. today I am supposed to be brave and at the forefront of leadership, work, family, etc. It is more common for women to head prestigious jobs and take on more responsibility,  however, it is biblical that the man is the head of the household.
What is Toby's plan?
He will lock Malvolio up in a dark room (jail) and pretend he is crazy or demon-possessed.
How does Toby describe Andrew?
Murderous, killed 3 people, good fighter and will not lose the fight
How does Toby's plan get upset?
Antonio takes Viola’s place because he thinks she’s Sebastian. Toby needs to step into the fight because Antonio is a trained fighter and will beat Andrew.
In the end, what does Andrew decide to go and do?
Andrew will go after Cesario and give him. Cesario, confused by Antonio's request for money, appears to be more cowardly and not trustworthy. 



Act 4, Scene 1
Sebastian asks, “Are all the people mad?” (lines 26-27).  Reread this short scene and consider the actions of Sebastian with Feste, then with Sir Andrew, and finally with Olivia. How does each character confuse and baffle Sebastian? 
Feste insists that Sebastian is Cesario and should go speak with Olivia, a woman Sebastian does not know. Andrew hits Sebastian, for no reason and Olivia protects then loves him. He is baffled by all the characters!
The humour of Sir Andrew’s second encounter with Cesario depends very much on gender role stereotypes. Why is Andrew so surprised when Cesario/Sebastian returns his punches? What had his earlier “fight” with Cesario/Viola led him to expect? 
Andrew expects him to be cowardly and scared to fight, but Sebastian is trained and ready to fight back.

Act 4, Scene 2
What does Feste dress up as? Is he thrilled to do it?
He dresses as a priest, Sir Topas the curate. He is there to further confuse Malvolio by saying he is in a well-lit room with windows. He is not happy to be telling lies as a priest. 
Feste’s portrayal of a clergyman pokes fun at the assumed solemnity and pomposity of some churchmen.  Do you agree with this act?  Is it accurate or could it be seen as a satire?
I do not agree with the act but I do agree with Shakespeare adding it to the play to show that he is not afraid to express his attitude and be brutally honest.
What is Malvolio's attitude in the prison?
Malvolio knows he is being wronged here. He asks for paper and ink so he can send a letter to Olivia and get help.

Act 4, Scene 3
Is this a necessary scene? If you were directing a version of the play, would you keep this scene or omit it? Explain the reasons for your decision.
I think this is a necessary scene because it leads to Malvolio’s threat at the end, which wraps up the entire play. Toby tells Feste to go back to the room in a normal voice because the prank has gone too long.
Act 5, Scene 1
Indignation, the feeling of being wronged or unjustly treated, is one of the strongest human emotions. What motivates Antonio’s indignation in this scene? Would he have expected Sebastian to treat him differently? If so, why?
Antonio is SO upset because he has only helped Sebastian and now he thinks Sebastian has betrayed his loyalty. He expects to be treated as he treats others. 
“I’ll sacrifice the lamb that I do love, / To spite a raven’s heart within a dove.” (lines 126-127)
In this scene, Orsino is another character who feels betrayed by someone close to him. What other emotions magnify his anger to the point where he threatens to kill the one he loves? Which (if any) emotions are justified? How do you account for his sudden reversal of intention when he discovers that Olivia and Sebastian are married?
Orsino would kill Viola for her perceived disloyalty. Orsino, as always, is overly passionate and would rather have Olivia and/or Viola to himself than allow them to live. He is jealous and feels wronged. He wants to seek revenge on Olivia for not loving him and for taking Viola away. I assume he loves the idea of love more than Olivia and is pleased to see that Viola is single and a woman. He loves Viola because he has shared secrets with her; however, his perceived love for Olivia, and Viola’s disguise, prevented him from seeing Viola as a mate. 
Sir Toby is another character who expresses a sense of indignation in this scene. Why does he blame his injury on Sir Andrew? What does this reveal about him? What advice would you offer Sir Toby on personal relationships?
It reveals that Toby is not willing to take the blame when he gets into trouble for his wrongdoing. He is cowardly and has a sense of entitlement. He is not moral and does not live by a moral code. 
Marriages
Olivia and Sebastian, Maria and Toby, Orsino and Viola.
“I’ll be revenged on the whole pack of you.” (line 370)
How does Malvolio’s threat introduce a sour note to the otherwise harmonious resolution of the play? 
The play’s ending is almost too good to be true, which is why Malvolio’s threat brings the audience back to reality. this shows that Shakespearean comedy doesn't resolve itself perfectly.