Lin Manuel Miranda tells the story of A.Ham’s ambition and legacy through the lens of critical hope while highlighting diversity to push back against historic and current vestiges of systemic racism.
Critical hope
Legacy of hamilton
Systemic racism
 Diversity 
Mistakes of history 

Book Study 

Seven fallen feathers 

Summary: Seven fallen feathers follows Tanya Talaga, as she uncovers the deaths of various indigenous students, who all left their reserves in order to attend school in Thunder Bay, Ontario. It explores their lives and struggles from living apart from their families and in foster homes, racism and prejudice against them, and their unfortunate deaths and reason as well as aftermath results of their death. It also dives deeper into how others make efforts to stop further deaths from happening, specifically in indigenous teens. 

The 7 main indigenous children cases: Jordan Wabasse, Jethro Anderson, Robyn Harper, Reggie Bushie, Curran Strang, Paul Panacheese, Kyle Morisseau

Jordan Wabasse
Young indigenous boy, loved by all, and loved to play hockey. He was sent to thunder bay to pursue his dream there. One day, he didn’t come home in time for dinner, which he is usually punctual for, so foster parents called the police. Search began 24 hours later, with no amber alerts sent out or any tactical teams. General police gave up on the search very quickly, only until the indigenous community stepped out did they continue the search. 92 days later, they found Jordan’s body near water in an area that a blind indigenous elder had predicted. People speculated that he was a target of a gang who mistook him as a boy named Jordan Waboose, which is why he got murdered. Autopsy only showed that he died of cold water drowning. 

Jethro Anderson
A 15 year old boy in grade 9 from Kasabonika first nation who went to TB to attend DFC. His parents had marital problems so he went to live with his aunt Dora and his cousins. On October 28, 2000, he went drinking with his friends and didn’t come home. He was later found in the Kam River with a gash on his head and cigarette burns on his body. 

Curran Strang 
A smart student from Pikangikum who attended DFC in 2005. He befriended a boy named James Benson, who was a good student and had a good reputation. His influence did not help though. Soon after Curran joined DFC, his grades started slipping and he went on a downward spiral. He started missing classes and getting put in detention constantly, with several reports. He drank a lot and did drugs; on top of that he was depressed and lonely. Eventually he was found dead in Mcintrye river. 

Paul Panacheese 
A student who attended DFC in 2006. One day he went out drinking with his friends and came home very late. His mom was already asleep so he went to the kitchen to get a midnight snack, only to collapse there. The next day, his mom woke up and found him unconscious on the kitchen floor; his pulse was gone. Autopsy couldnt find the cause of death. 

Robyn Harper 
A student at DFC who went to a drinking party when she first joined the school to fit in with her peers. It was the first time she drank, so she didn’t know her tolerance. When she went home, she fell asleep on the floor, where her foster parents found her in the morning. Until that point she was still alive, just unconscious. Foster parent just left her on the floor and when he came back from work, she had died. Autopsy was from alcohol poisoning. 
 
Reggie Bushie 
An indigenous 15 yr old boy went drinking one night with his brother Ricki and his friends, drowned in the Macintyre river. 

Kyle Morrisseau 
Grandson of Norval Morrisseau, Indigenous chief, and was very smart and was considered the “golden boy”, won multiple awards in arts. He transferred to DFC away from his family, but wrote them letters everyday. Gradually, the letters stop coming to his family and he started to skip school. He started drinking and getting in trouble and writing a lot of reports. On october 26th, he disappeared and he was found in the river 1011 days later. Autopsy report said the cause of death was drowning, but alcohol was also a contributing factor.

