Misia Lui
ENG3U
Mrs. Choi
November. 9, 2023
A Flicker of Light Within the Darkness: Unity Between the Settlers and Indigenous People
A fire is very delicate. Once lit, one wrong move and it’ll go out, especially in a weak environment. The relationship between the settlers and the Indigenous people went out ages ago just like a weak flame, but that doesn’t mean it can’t be relit. Unity and harmony can be restored between the settlers and the Indigenous people if people become more educated on events regarding the two parties in the past, as well as the will to learn and forgive on both ends. Tanya Talaga’s book ‘Seven Fallen Feathers’ delves into an in-depth meaning of the 7 fires, a prophecy that is known to most if not all of the Indigenous community, “Every Anishinaabe person knows the prophecy of the seven fires.” (Talaga, 16). The prophecy of the seven fires begins with the first fire telling a story of how peaceful it was before the Europeans came; but only when the settlers betrayed the Indigenous did they continue to the fifth fire, as predicted in the fourth fire: “This prophecy warned that the Anishinaabe would be able to tell the future by reading the faces of the light-skinned race.” (Talaga, 17). Destruction, war, and deception would fall upon the Indigenous between the fifth and sixth fires, until the younger generation would come out and try to reclaim their culture in the seventh fire “Each fire represents a key time in the history of the people on Turtle Island and the continent of North America” (Talaga, 16). The book then talks about how in the seventh fire, the younger generation of the Indigenous people will rise and try to fight back for their culture, and if they fail, that is the end of their heritage. Getting help from their relatives and ancestors may prove quite challenging, as described by Talaga, “but many of the Elders would have fallen asleep or otherwise unable to help” (Talaga,18). Settlers have to acknowledge the historical challenges and conflicts that the Indigenous people faced as the first step toward reconciliation, otherwise the path towards peace and reconciliation, aka the 8th fire, will be blocked indefinitely. To move forward together, it must be recognized that understanding each other’s perspectives, applying education within the future learning system, and collaborative reconciliation is imperative for the healing process.
Many Indigenous people would probably doubt if it was possible to go through the seventh fire and into the eighth due to their past relationship struggles between the settlers of Canada and the Indigenous peoples should be the first step. In the past, the settlers took land, abused their food resources, tried to assimilate them, and took power over them. In a way, the Indigenous have somewhat let the world around them change and take advantage of them, which can be seen as an overall theme within ‘Seven Fallen Feathers’. A reason why Talaga wrote the book was to let other people be aware of how Indigenous youths are all too easily swallowed up and destroyed by a racist society that neglects their needs. Cultural genocide can be traced back all the way to residential schools from as early as 1833, which were schools aiming to both instruct and influence Indigenous youth, aiming at their assimilation into Canadian society. An example specifically in 1966, talks about Pearl Wenjack watching all 8 of her siblings being shipped off to residential schools while she stayed behind (Talaga, 75). Specifically, her brother Chanie Wenjack’s story is important. He is the one who ends up running away from his school but dies due to extreme hunger and exposure to the cold near train tracks one week after attempting to find his way back home (Talaga, 82). Hard labour and abuse, bullying, and even sexual assault (Talaga, 73,87) within this book are what Chanie and many other Indigenous children tried to run away from. If it weren't for the residential schools issued due to the Indian Act in 1876, things may have ended differently. The Indian Act was used as a way to manage land and control First Nations statuses, but also to restrict the Indigenous people and assimilate them into an unfamiliar society ignorant of their culture. Residential schools are one of the outcomes. They lost their background and traditions, as well as their social and economic independence as a community because of this. 
In the messy concept of reconciliation between the settlers and the Indigenous, education weaves together the past, present, and future. For settlers seeking genuine unity with Indigenous communities, they need a commitment to comprehensive and accurate education on Indigenous issues. Today, many things have helped educate others about the history of the relationship between the Canadian settlers and the Indigenous peoples. An example would be this article published by CBC News titled, ‘Ontario has 'come quite far' on Indigenous education but there's much more to be done: report’ talks about how the Ontario school system has contributed much in learning regarding indigenous history, “..professional development for school staff on Indigenous education has more than doubled over the last decade for elementary schools, from 34 per cent in 2012-13 to 76 percent in 2022-23, and for secondary schools, from 34 per cent in 2012-13 to 82 percent in 2022-23.” (Brown, 2023). Brock Pitawanakwat, a coordinator of the Indigenous program at York University says to CBC News, “Often Indigenous education was something that I think teachers struggled with because they hadn't received this education themselves," (Brown, 2023). This is an interesting observation, as it can be correlated to the 7 fires since it is specified in the 7th fire that if the elders of the Indigenous community were unable to help, the younger generation would have to find a way to save their culture themselves (Talaga, 2017, p.18). Education has come so far as to educate so many parts of Canada proving that the prophecy of the 7th fire can definitely be accomplished. By looking into these sources, Canadian settlers can challenge and reshape their original perceptions, cultivating a more sophisticated and deeper understanding of the experiences that make Indigenous culture so special. Correspondingly, the addition of several Indigenous-based courses can also serve as a distinction towards the First Nations people and their long history. Furthermore, the people of Canada should recognize the transformative potential of educational initiatives that can bring individuals from both communities together. 
The wisdom and guidance of the older generation within Indigenous communities remain pivotal in aiding the younger generation as they navigate the challenges of the seventh fire. Though the older generation “may have fallen asleep or be otherwise unable to help” 
(Talaga, 18), it does not mean that they are completely out of the equation to help. The first chapter of ‘Seven Fallen Feathers’ shows Talaga visiting Stan Beardy, NAN’s Grand Chief, looking to ask some questions (Talaga, 14). However, it was somewhat tough at the beginning to wrestle with obtaining answers, “It was a frustrating exchange. We were speaking two different languages.” (Talaga, 15), Talaga eventually realized that Stan was trying to send her a message about what problems she can focus on within the Indigenous community, starting with the case of Jordan Wabasse, a 15 year old Indigenous boy attending Matawa Learning Centre. Jordan’s case talks about how he disappeared in Thunder Bay around February of 2011, but was found dead 92 days later with a conclusion casually closed by the police. Which was what seemed off to Talaga (Talaga, 2017). Without the help of Stan, the book might not have ever been made and would've never been started up as fast as it did. Even if it was only subtly, this exchange of helpfulness between Talaga and the NAN’s Grand Chief helped more people understand the struggles of the Indigenous community through this book. Living conditions are also not the best in regards to the Indigenous, not to mention the poverty that the Canadian government ultimately caused a long time ago. So even if the process may be slow, if things continue to grow between the settlers and the Indigenous, there must also be the will of respect and a genuine desire to make things better; only then will there be potential for economic and resourceful partnerships that will be helpful towards the Indigenous communities as well as contributing to sustainable development. 
Moving forward into the 8th fire requires a collective acknowledgment of the past, a commitment to learning from it, and a shared dedication to shaping a future where settlers and Indigenous communities walk together on a path of harmony. Another article from CBC titled ‘Hundreds gather for National Indigenous Peoples Day celebrations in Whitehorse’ talks about how so many people have come to honour the traditions and culture of the Indigenous people. There are countless articles on these topics, but this article was chosen due to what Jessie Dawson, a councilor with the Kwanlin Dün First Nation said.“Today is a day we can feel pride and say 'this is who I am, this is where we are, and this is where I come from.”(Lach, 2022).
Little by little, the Indigenous community is starting to feel more comfortable with owning up to their culture, and they can embrace who they are, which is exactly what the prophecy wanted to happen in the end. This does not necessarily mean that the present time has passed through the 7th fire, but in this stage, every little bit of appreciation goes a long way. There has and will always be racism and discrimination towards the First Nation communities, but instead of lingering on that feeling, focusing on acknowledging the past, learning from it, and focusing on trying to reach equality can shape a future where settlers and Indigenous communities walk together can lead our generation on a closer path of harmony.
	Taking everything into account, moving forward into the 8th fire necessitates concrete steps– understanding perspectives, education application, and commitment to reconciliation, all while honouring the past and shaping a more applicable future. The ultimate interpretation of the relationship between the settlers and the Indigenous people has already begun to show signs of a spark, which will eventually lead to a small flame of light– that is the 8th and final fire.
Work Citation Sources

Brown, D. (2023, April 24). Ontario has 'come quite far' on Indigenous education but there's much more to be done: report. CBC. Retrieved November 14, 2023, from https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/ontario-indigenous-education-1.6820604

Lach, M. (2022, June 22). Hundreds gather for National Indigenous Peoples Day celebrations in Whitehorse. CBC. Retrieved November 14, 2023, from https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/national-indigenous-peoples-day-whitehorse-june-21-2022-1.6496654

Talaga, T. (2017). Seven Fallen Feathers: Racism, Death, and Hard Truths in a Northern City. Anansi.