Misia Lui
ENG3U
Mrs. Choi
November. 9, 2023
A Flicker of Light Within the Darkness: Unity Between the Settlers and Indigenous People

A fire is very delicate. Once lit, one wrong move and it’ll go out, especially in a weak environment. The relationship between the settlers and the Indigenous people ages ago went out just like a weak flame, but that doesn’t mean it can’t be relit. Unity and harmony can be restored between the settlers and the Indigenous people if people become more educated on certain topics, as well as the will to learn and forgive on both ends.  Tanya Talaga’s book ‘The Seven Fallen Feathers’ describes an in-depth meaning of all 7 fires, as well as the ultimate solution to fix the dilemma, which is the 8th fire. People have to acknowledge the historical challenges and conflicts as a crucial first step toward reconciliation, otherwise, the path towards the 8th fire will be blocked indefinitely. The Indigenous have always been put in the victim position, but just looking at the exterior facts may not be enough to look at the full picture. The settlers have taken so many things away from the Indigenous community and yet no one usually acknowledges most of the hardships that come with that.  To move forward together, it must be recognized that understanding each other’s perspectives, applying education within the future learning system, and collaborating in reconciliation is not only beneficial but imperative for the healing process.
The prophecy of the seven fires is known to most if not all of the Indigenous community, “Every Anishinaabe person knows the prophecy of the seven fires.” (Talaga, 16). The prophecy begins with the first fire telling a story of how peaceful it was before the Europeans came; but only when the settlers betrayed the indigenous did the fires continue to the fifth fire, as predicted in the fourth fire: “This prophecy warned that the Anishinaabe would be able to tell the future by reading the faces of the light-skinned race.” (Talaga, 17). Destruction, war, and deception would fall upon the Indigenous between the fifth and sixth fires until the younger generation would come out and try to avenge their culture and reclaim it in the seventh fire “Each fire represents a key time in the history of the people on Turtle Island and the continent of North America” (Talaga, 16) The book then talks about how in the seventh fire, the younger generation of the Indigenous people will rise and try to fight back for their culture, and if they fail that is the end of everything. Should they need help from their relatives and ancestors may be quite hard because as Talaga describes, “but many of the Elders would have fallen asleep or otherwise unable to help” (Talaga,18). 
Many Indigenous people would doubt if it was possible to go through the seventh fire and into the eighth, which is either failure or success simply put, but understanding the relationship between the settlers and the Indigenous should be the first step. In the past, settlers took land, abused their food resources, tried to assimilate them, and took power over them. The Indigenous have somewhat let the world around them change and take advantage of them, which can be seen as an overall theme within ‘Seven Fallen Feathers’. A reason why Talaga wrote the book was to let other people be aware of how Indigenous youths are all too easily swallowed up and destroyed by a racist society that neglects their needs. Cultural genocide can be traced back to residential schools. An example specifically in 1966 talks about Pearl Wenjack watching all 8 of her siblings being shipped off to residential schools while she stays behind (Talaga, 75). Specifically, her brother Chanie Wenjack is important because he is the one who ends up running away from his school, but ends up dying due to extreme hunger and exposure to the cold on train tracks one week after trying to find his way back home (Talaga, 82).  None of what happened to Chanie would’ve occurred if it weren’t for the residential schools issued by the Indian Act in 1876. The act was used as a way to manage land and keep track of First Nations statuses when in reality the Indian Act was used to control the Indigenous people and assimilate them into a society not of their own culture. They lost their background and traditions, and social, and economic independence as a community because of this. 
In the messy concept of reconciliation between the settlers and the Indigenous, education emerges as a powerful thread weaving together the past, present, and future. For settlers seeking genuine unity with Indigenous communities, they need a commitment to comprehensive and accurate education. Today, many things have contributed to educating others about the history of their relationship. An article published by CBC News titled ‘Ontario has 'come quite far' on Indigenous education but there's much more to be done: report’ talks about how the Ontario school system has contributed so much to Indigenous history and studies, “..professional development for school staff on Indigenous education has more than doubled over the last decade for elementary schools, from 34 per cent in 2012-13 to 76 percent in 2022-23, and for secondary schools, from 34 per cent in 2012-13 to 82 percent in 2022-23.” (Brown, 2023). Brock Pitawanakwat, a coordinator of the Indigenous program at York University says to CBC News: “Often Indigenous education was something that I think teachers struggled with because they hadn't received this education themselves,". (Brown, 2023) This is an interesting observation, as it can be correlated to the 7 fires since it is specified in the 7th fire that if the elders of the Indigenous community were unable to help, the younger generation would have to find a way to save their culture themselves (Talaga, 2017, p.18). The fact that education has come so far as to educate so many parts of Canada proves that the prophecy of the 7th fire can be succeeded. By immersing into these sources, settlers can challenge and reshape their original perceptions, cultivating a more sophisticated and empathetic understanding of the experiences that make the Indigenous culture so special. Correspondingly, the addition to countless Indigenous-based courses can also serve as an honour for the First Nations and their long history. Furthermore, settlers should recognize the transformative potential of educational initiatives that bring individuals from both communities together. 
By working together for reconciliation, joint efforts provide hope and show the way to unity and shared success. Settlers and Indigenous communities need to understand how their futures are linked and need to actively form partnerships that go beyond historical differences. While there are no outstanding instances where the Indigenous and the settlers are seen working together to move forward inside the stories of Talaga’s book, the first chapter shows Talaga visiting the Prime Minister at the time Stephen Harper, looking to ask some questions (Talaga, 14). Though it was somewhat tough at the beginning to wrestle with getting some answers, “It was a frustrating exchange. We were speaking two different languages.” (Talaga, 15), Talaga eventually realized that Harper was trying to send her a message on what problems she can focus on within the Indigenous community. Without the help of Harper, the book would’ve never been started up as fast as it did. Even if it was only subtly, this exchange of helpfulness between Talaga, an Indigenous person, and Stephen Harper, a settler, helped more people understand the struggles of the Indigenous community through this book. Living conditions are also not the best in regards to the Indigenous, not to mention the poverty that the Canadian government ultimately caused a long time ago. So even if the process may be slow, if things continue to grow between the settlers and the Indigenous, there must also be the will of respect and a genuine desire to make things better; only then will there be potential for economic and resourceful partnerships that will be helpful towards the Indigenous communities as well as contributing to sustainable development. 
Moving forward into the 8th fire requires a collective acknowledgment of the past, a commitment to learning from it, and a shared dedication to shaping a future where settlers and Indigenous communities walk together on a path of harmony. Another article from CBC titled ‘Hundreds gather for National Indigenous Peoples Day celebrations in Whitehorse’ talks about how so many people have come to honour the traditions and culture of the Indigenous people. There are countless articles on these topics, but this article was chosen due to what Jessie Dawson, a councillor with the Kwanlin Dün First Nation said.“Today is a day we can feel pride and say 'this is who I am, this is where we are, and this is where I come from.”(Lach, 2022).
Little by little, the Indigenous community is starting to feel more comfortable with owning up to their culture, and they are able to embrace who they are, which is exactly what the prophecy wanted to happen in the end. This does not necessarily mean that the present time has passed through the 7th fire, but in this stage, every little bit of appreciation goes a long way. There has and will always be racism and discrimination towards the First Nation communities, but instead of lingering on that feeling, focusing on acknowledging the past, learning from it, and focusing on trying to reach equality can shape a future where settlers and Indigenous communities walk together can lead our generation on a closer path of harmony.
	Taking everything into account, moving forward into the 8th fire necessitates concrete steps– understanding perspectives, education application, and commitment to reconciliation, all while honouring the past and shaping a more applicable future. The ultimate interpretation of the relationship between the settlers and the Indigenous people has already begun to show signs of a spark, which will eventually lead to a small flame of light– that is the 8th and final fire.
