You’re an astronaut, and after a botched mission, find yourself floating through the galaxy alone. With only a few hours of oxygen left, hope is dwindling. Just when it’s looking grim, an alien ship passing by picks you up and takes you on board. To your surprise, they take you to a room full of earth’s space junk, and demand to know what each bit of trash is.

“You.. want me to tell you what this is? All of it?” The aliens nod; I’m a bit confused. 5 minutes ago I was drifting in the middle of space with a broken tether ready to accept my fate, now I’m in some mythical spaceship filled with aliens? Tell me I’m dreaming. The alien handed me a crumpled up juice box.. Cranberry juice? My mind is too fuzzy to comprehend what is going on, so I hand back the piece of trash and collapse on the floor. I never believed in aliens, I didn’t want to. Maybe a reason why I pursued to be an astronaut was because of the unspoken mysteries within; since I was young I wanted to know if the stories that everyone told to everyone were real, or just a myth. Later, as I grew up, my father died. The last things he told me were how he hoped that one day I could go out into the wondrous mystery that is space and see the inhuman, but beautiful creations that mankind would never see unless they were willing. I never understood what that meant, I still don’t.  How did my father even come to a conclusion that there was even anything out there anyway? He never set foot outside of earth, let alone studied it. 

I woke up back inside the spaceship, dazed and slightly dizzy for some reason. Another alien walks over to me and hands me yet another piece of trash… this time, an old plastic water bottle. Having more composure now, I tell the alien what the item is. No response. They bounce over to the gigantic pile of trash and continue to bring one piece after another to me. This goes on for about another 1 hour or so. I don’t understand the point of this. If aliens do exist, I expected them to be highly intelligent, what a let down. Now once more the alien brings me a piece of trash; my vision begins to blur up, I must be getting tired.. But as the alien walks closer with the piece of junk, I realize something. Why does that item look so familiar? That’s when it hits me, isn’t that my father’s watch? What’s it doing here, in space? I could’ve sworn I put it in my safe at home on earth. But low and behold, there it was, the only piece in that pile of trash that looked brand new. With its smooth leather yolk, gold embroidery across the clock, glass clear as day. I pause for a minute. Instead of telling the alien what the watch is, I ask them: “how did you get that.”. No response again. I stare back at the watch. Suddenly, a wave of memories came flooding into my head, memories I thought I had forgotten, memories that gave me too many emotions that I couldn’t process all at the same time, memories of my father. I was so little when he passed, why can I remember me with him as clear as day? I looked back at all the pieces of trash the alien had given me, and finally, I came to a realization. 

“Are… these all mine?” The alien nods. Not a strong response, but a good enough response for me to finally understand the reason behind their actions. I walk back to the gigantic pile of trash, and one by one memories of each item come to my mind, of the significance they had to me. What had felt like just seconds, turned out to be the next few hours. I had been going through all the pieces of trash, remembering fragments of memories, like a slideshow of my life. I look back to the alien, with tears in my eyes; not sad tears, happy tears. I felt some sort of relief after going through all the points throughout my life. Before going on this mission as an astronaut, I remember faintly thinking why I was doing this in the first place. What was the point of it? Why? I remember now. I wanted to fulfill my father’s wish. It wasn’t my wish, but I wanted to do it, in hopes that maybe, just maybe, I’d be able to meet him again. “The wondrous mystery that hides within space, I want you to see the inhuman, but beautiful creations that mankind would never see unless they went far enough.” My father says. Was this what he meant? After crying, it’s getting harder to breathe…. Hold on.

…..

Oh. I see. This makes sense now. I walk around the mysterious spaceship one last time, as my heartbeat becomes fainter and fainter, and the alien walks in front of me. “You’re here to bring me away, aren’t you?” Slowly but surely, the alien nods once again. I was right. The alien brings their arm towards me, holding out their squigly hand. I reach for the alien's hand, and just like that, my vision comes back to me, and I’m back in the limitless space, in my astronaut suit, and broken tether. My mind is slipping away, I can tell. I breathe heavily, and my body becomes numb. With the last of my muscles, I hold a smile as I close my eyes into the never ending darkness. 

….is that, light? A bright silhouette walks towards me, and holds my hand. 
Dad?
